                                                                                       ﻿




                         Systematic Trading


Robert Carver worked in the City of London for over a decade. He initially traded exotic
derivative products for Barclays Investment Bank and then worked as a portfolio manager
for AHL – one of the world’s largest systematic hedge funds – before, during and after
the global financial meltdown of 2008. He was responsible for the creation of AHL’s
fundamental global macro strategy and then managed the fund’s multi-billion dollar fixed
income portfolio before retiring from the industry in 2013. Robert, who has bachelors
and masters degrees in Economics, now systematically trades his own portfolio of futures
and equities.
Every owner of a physical copy of this version of
              Systematic Trading
 can download the eBook for free direct from
us at Harriman House, in a format that can be
  read on any eReader, tablet or smartphone.

               Simply head to:
ebooks.harriman-house.com/systematictrading
         to get your free eBook now.
       Systematic Trading
A unique new method for designing trading
          and investing systems




               Robert Carver
HARRIMAN HOUSE LTD
18 College Street
Petersfield
Hampshire
GU31 4AD
GREAT BRITAIN
Tel: +44 (0)1730 233870
Email: contact@harriman-house.com
Website: www.harriman-house.com


First published in Great Britain in 2015
Copyright © Robert Carver
The right of Robert Carver to be identified as the Author has been asserted in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.


Hardback ISBN: 9780857194459
eBook ISBN: 9780857195005


British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from the British Library.
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise without the prior written permission of the Publisher. This book may not be lent, resold,
hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form of binding or cover other than that
in which it is published, without the prior written consent of the Publisher.
No responsibility for loss occasioned to any person or corporate body acting or refraining to act
as a result of reading material in this book can be accepted by the Publisher, by the Author, or by
the Employer of the Author.


Page number cross references refer to the print edition.
“In every case the accuracy of experts was matched or exceeded by a simple
algorithm... Why are experts inferior to algorithms? One reason... is that
experts try to be clever, think outside the box, and consider complex
combinations of features in making their predictions. Complexity may
work in the odd case but more often than not it reduces validity.”

                                Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow
Preface

Systematic trading and investing
I am very bad at making financial decisions. Like most people I find it difficult to manage
my investments without becoming emotional and behaving irrationally. This is deeply
irritating as I consider myself to be very knowledgeable about finance. I’ve voraciously
read the academic literature, done my own detailed research, spent 20 years investing my
own money and nearly a decade managing funds for large institutions.
So in theory I know what I’m doing. In practice when faced with a decision to buy or sell
a stock things go wrong. Fear and greed wash through my mind, clouding my judgment.
Even if I’ve spent weeks researching a company it’s still hard to click the trade button on
my broker’s website. I have to stop myself buying or selling on a whim, based on nothing
more than random newspaper articles or an anonymous blogger’s opinion. But then, like
you, I’m only human.
Fortunately there is a solution. The answer is to fully, or partly, systematise your financial
decision making. Creating a trading system removes the emotion and makes it easier to
commit to a consistent strategy.
I spent many years managing a large portfolio of trading strategies for a systematic hedge
fund. Unfortunately I didn’t have the opportunity to develop and trade systems to look
after my personal portfolio. But after leaving the industry I’ve been able to make my own
trading process entirely systematic, resulting in significantly better performance.
There are many authors and websites offering trading systems. But many of these
‘systems’ require subjective interpretation, so they are not actually systematic. Some are
even downright dangerous, trading too quickly and expensively, and in excessive size.
They present you with a single ‘one size fits all’ system which won’t suit everybody. I will
explain how to develop your own trading system, for your own needs, and which should
not be excessively dangerous or costly to operate.
I’ve found systematic investing to be more profitable, and to require less time and effort.
This book should help you to reap similar benefits.

                                                                                            vii
Systematic Trading



Who should read this book
This book is intended for everyone who wishes to systematise their financial decision
making, either completely or to some degree.
Most people would describe themselves as traders or investors, although there are no
consistently accepted definitions of either group. What I have to say is applicable to both
kinds of readers so I use the terms trading and investing interchangeably; the use of one
usually implies the other is included.
This book will be useful to amateurs – individual investors trading their own money –
and to market professionals who invest on behalf of others. The term ‘amateur’ is not
intended to be patronising. It means only that you are not getting paid to manage money
and is no reflection on your level of skill.
This is not intended to be a parochial book solely for UK or US investors and I use
examples from a range of countries. Many books are written specifically for particular
asset markets. My aim is to provide a general framework that will suit traders of every
asset. I use specific examples from the equity, bond, foreign exchange and commodity
markets. These are traded with spread bets, exchange traded funds1 and futures. But I
do not explain the mechanics of trading in detail. If you are not familiar with a particular
market you should consult other books or websites before designing your trading system.
It might surprise you, but this book will also be useful for those who are sceptical of
computers entirely replacing human judgment. This is because there are several parts to a
complete trading system. Trading rules provide a prediction on whether something will
go up or down in price. These can be purely systematic, or based on human discretion.
But it is equally important to have a good framework of position and risk management. I
believe that a systematic framework should be used by all traders and investors for position
and risk management, even if the adoption of fully systematic rules is not desirable.
If you can beat simple rules when it comes to predicting prices, I show you how to use
your opinions in a systematic framework to make the best use of your talents. Alternatively
you might feel it is unlikely that anyone, man or machine, can predict the markets. In
this case, the same framework can be used to construct the best portfolio consistent with
that pessimistic view.

Three examples
Throughout this book I focus on three typical groups of systematic traders and investors.
Don’t panic if you don’t fit neatly into any of these categories. I’ve chosen them because
between them they illustrate the most important issues which face all potential systematic
traders and investors.


1. All terms in bold are defined in the glossary.

viii
                                                                                                     ﻿ Preface


In the final part of the book I discuss how to create a system tailored for each of these
audiences. Before then, each time you see one or more of these heading boxes it indicates
that the material in that section of the book is aimed mainly at the relevant group and is
optional for others.


Asset allocating investor

An asset allocating investor allocates funds amongst, and within, different asset classes.
Asset allocators can use systematic methods to avoid the short-term chasing of fads and
fashions that they know will reduce their returns. They might be lazy and wise amateur
investors, or managing institutional portfolios with long horizons such as pension funds.
Asset allocators are sceptical about those who claim to get extra returns from frequent
trading. For this reason the basic asset allocation example assumes you can’t forecast how
asset prices will perform. However some investors might want to incorporate their views,
or the views of others. I show you how to achieve this without overtrading or ending up
with an extreme portfolio.
Unlike the other examples asset allocators usually don’t use leverage. I illustrate the
investment process with the use of unleveraged passive exchange traded funds (ETFs).
But the methods I show apply equally well to investors in collective funds of both the
active and passive varieties, and to those investing in portfolios of individual securities.
My own portfolio includes a basket of ETFs which I manage using the principles of the
asset allocating investor.


Semi-automatic trader

Semi-automatic traders live in a world of opportunistic bets2 taken on a fluid set of
assets. Semi-automatic traders think they are superior to simple rules when it comes to
forecasting by how much prices will go up or down; instead they make their own educated
guesses. However they would like to place those bets inside a systematic framework
which will ensure their positions and risk are properly managed. This frees them up to
spend more time making the right call on the market.
In my example the semi-automatic trader is comfortable with leverage and investing
with derivatives. They are both buyers and sellers, betting for or against asset prices. My
semi-automatic trader is active in equity index and commodity spread bet markets, but
the example is widely applicable elsewhere.

2. I am not using the gambling term ‘bet’ here in a pejorative sense. In my opinion the distinction some
people draw between financial gambling, trading and investing is completely meaningless: they all involve
taking financial risk on uncertain outcomes. Indeed professional gamblers usually have a better understanding
of risk management than many people working in the investment industry.

                                                                                                            ix
Systematic Trading



I trade a portfolio of UK equities using the framework I’ve outlined here for semi-
automatic traders.


Staunch systems trader

The staunch systems trader is a true believer in the benefits of fully systematic trading.
Unlike the semi-automatic trader and the asset allocating investor, they embrace the
use of systematic trading rules to forecast price changes, but within the same common
framework for position risk management.
Many systems traders think they can find trading rules that give them extra profits, or
alpha. Others are unconvinced they have any special skill but believe there are additional
returns available which can’t be captured just by ‘buy and hold’ investing. They can use
very simple rules to capture these sources of alternative beta.
Systems traders may have access to back-testing software, either in off-the-shelf packages,
spreadsheets or bespoke software. It isn’t absolutely necessary to have such programs as
I will be providing a flexible pre-configured trading system which doesn’t need back-
testing. However if you want to develop your own new ideas I will show you how to use
these powerful software tools safely.
Like semi-automatic traders, staunch systems traders are comfortable with derivatives
and leverage. Although the examples I give are for futures trading, they are equally valid
for trading similar assets.
I trade over 40 futures contracts with my own money using a fully systematic set of eight
trading rules.


The technical stuff
Inevitably this is a subject which requires some specialised terminology. Although I try
and keep jargon to a minimum it’s usually easier to use a well-known shorthand term
rather than spelling everything out. Words and phrases highlighted in bold are briefly
defined in the glossary.
As well as standard finance vocabulary I use my own invented terms. So phrases like
instrument block are also in bold type, and appear in the glossary with a short explanation.
Certain important concepts require deeper understanding and I will include more detail
when I first use them, as in the box below.
All detailed explanations in the text are signposted from the glossary, to help you refer to
them later in the book.




x
                                                                                       ﻿Preface


   CONCEPT: EXAMPLE
   These concept boxes give detailed explanations of key concepts in the book.




What is coming
Running a systematic strategy is just like following any list of instructions, such as a
recipe. Many books on trading are like fast food outlets which give you something quick
and convenient to eat from a limited menu. However I am going to help you create your
own strategies; this is more than just a cookbook, it’s a guide to writing recipes from
scratch. Inventing your own system requires extra work upfront, but it is more satisfying
and profitable in the long run.
To create your own recipes requires an understanding of the science of food chemistry
and of different kinds of dishes. Similarly, part one of this book – ‘Theory’ – provides a
theoretical basis for why you should run systematic strategies and gives an overview of the
trading styles that are available.
Part two – ‘Toolbox’ – provides you with two key methods used in the creation of systematic
strategies: back-testing and portfolio optimisation. Like sharp kitchen knives these are
powerful tools, but also potentially dangerous. When misused large trading losses can be
made despite apparently promising ideas. I will show you how to use them properly – and
when you don’t need them.
Part three – ‘Framework’ – provides a complete and extendable framework for the
creation of systematic strategies. Finally in part four – ‘Practice’ – I show three different
uses of the framework in action. I illustrate how it can be adapted for each of the semi-
automatic trader, asset allocating investor and staunch systems trader.
This book couldn’t possibly be a comprehensive guide to the entire subject of trading.
Appendix A contains some books I would recommend for further reading and others I’ve
referred to in the text. There is also advice on where you can get data and access to suitable
brokers to begin investing systematically.
I’ve avoided putting mathematical formulas and detailed algorithms into the main text.
Instead appendix B contains detailed specifications for the trading rules, appendix C
covers portfolio optimisation, and appendix D includes further details on implementing
the framework. The website for this book – www.systematictrading.org – includes
additional material.
This is not a book about automating trading strategies. It’s possible to trade systematically
using an entirely manual process with just a spreadsheet to speed up calculations, so
automation is not necessary. Nevertheless automation is desirable when running fast and
complex strategies. My website also includes some details on my own automated system
and guidance to help you develop your own.
                                                                                             xi
Contents
Prefacevii
    Systematic trading and investing         vii
    Who should read this book               viii
    The technical stuff                        x
    What is coming                            xi
Introduction1
    January 2009                              1
    September 2008                            2
    Why you should start system trading now   3
    It’s dangerous out there                  5
    Why you should read this book             6
Part One. Theory                               9
Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain       11
   Chapter overview                       11
   Humans should be great traders, but... 11
   Simple trading rules                   16
   Sticking to the plan                   16
   Good system design                     19
Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules     25
   Chapter overview                       25
   What makes a good trading rule         26
   When trading rules don’t work          29
   Why certain rules are profitable       30
   Classifying trading styles             38
   Achievable Sharpe ratios               46
   Conclusion48
Part Two. Toolbox                             49
Chapter Three. Fitting                        51
   Chapter overview                           51
   The perils of over-fitting                 52
   Some rules for effective fitting           65
   How I choose my rules                      67


                                                    xiii
Systematic Trading



Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation                 69
   Chapter overview                                70
   Optimising gone bad                             70
   Saving optimisation from itself                 75
   Making weights by hand                          77
   Incorporating Sharpe ratios                     85
Part Three. Framework                              91
Chapter Five. Framework Overview                   93
   Chapter overview                                93
   A bad example                                   94
   Why a modular framework?                        96
   The elements of the framework                   98
Chapter Six. Instruments                          101
   Chapter overview                               102
   Necessities102
   Instrument choice and trading style            103
   Access105
   Summary of instrument choice                   107
Chapter Seven. Forecasts                          109
   Chapter overview                               110
   What makes a good forecast                     110
   Discretionary trading with stop losses         114
   The asset allocating investor’s ‘no-rule’ rule 116
   Two example systematic rules                   117
   Adapting and creating trading rules            120
   Selecting trading rules and variations         122
   Summary of trading rules and forecasts         122
Chapter Eight. Combined Forecasts                 125
   Chapter overview                               126
   Combining with forecast weights                126
   Choosing the forecast weights                  126
   Getting to 10                                  128
   Capped at 20                                   132
   Summary for combining forecasts                133
Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting                135
   Chapter overview                               136
   The importance of risk targeting               136
   Setting a volatility target                    137
   Rolling up profits and losses                  149
   What percentage of capital per trade?          150
   Summary of volatility targeting                151
Chapter Ten. Position Sizing                      153
   Chapter overview                               154
   How risky is it?                               154
   Volatility target and position risk            158
   From forecast to position                      159

xiv
                                                                      Contents


   Summary for position sizing                                 161
Chapter Eleven. Portfolios                                     165
   Chapter overview                                            166
   Portfolios and instrument weights                           166
   Instrument weights – asset allocators and systems traders   167
   Instrument weights – semi-automatic trading                 169
   Instrument diversification multiplier                       169
   A portfolio of positions and trades                         171
   Summary for creating a portfolio of trading subsystems      175
Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size                                 177
   Chapter overview                                            178
   Speed of trading                                            178
   Calculating the cost of trading                             179
   Using trading costs to make design decisions                187
   Trading with more or less capital                           199
   Determining overall portfolio size                          202
   Summary of tailoring systems for costs and capital          203
Part Four. Practice                                            207
Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader        209
   Chapter overview                            209
   Who are you?                                209
   Using the framework                         210
   Process216
   Trading diary                               219
Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor    225
   Chapter overview                            225
   Who are you?                                225
   Using the framework                         226
   Weekly process                              233
   Trading diary                               234
Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader        245
   Chapter overview                            245
   Who are you?                                245
   Using the framework                         246
   Daily process                               254
   Trading diary                               255
Epilogue. What Makes a Good Systematic Trader? 259
Glossary261
Appendices273
Appendix A. Resources                                          275
   Further reading                                             275
   Sources of free data                                        277
   Brokers and platforms                                       278
   Automation and coding                                       279



                                                                            xv
Systematic Trading



Appendix B. Trading Rules                                           281
   The A and B system: Early profit taker and early loss taker      281
   The exponentially weighted moving average crossover (EWMAC) rule 282
   The carry trading rule                                           285
Appendix C. Portfolio Optimisation                                  289
   More details on bootstrapping                                    289
   Rule of thumb correlations                                       291
Appendix D. Framework Details                                       297
   Rescaling forecasts                                              297
   Calculation of diversification multiplier                        297
   Calculating price volatility from historic data                  298
Acknowledgements301

Index303




xvi
Introduction

January 2009

I T WAS 23 JANUARY 2009 AND I WAS IN MY LONDON OFFICE. ALTHOUGH
  I had a desk overlooking the Thames I was usually too busy to appreciate the view. My
day job was managing a portfolio of systematic trading strategies for a large hedge fund.
But right now I was focusing on my own bank balance.
Data was about to be released indicating how the UK economy had performed in the last
three months of 2008. It would be bad news – the official confirmation that we were in
recession – but nobody knew how bad. This didn’t mean extra work for me however, since
a bank of computers would adjust our clients’ portfolios automatically when the news
arrived. So I decided to devote some rare free time to trade my own money.
With a stressful full-time job I was not a particularly active trader but very occasionally an
opportunity came up that was too good to miss. This was one of them. In my research I
found that historically when people’s fears were confirmed by terrible economic numbers
was often the best time to buy; and this was potentially the worst news I’d seen in my
lifetime.
Careful analysis showed that the banks, hardest hit by the financial crisis, should rebound
the most if things improved. I was particularly attracted to Barclays. I had traded for
their investment bank a few years before and their balance sheet was in relatively good
condition. But I also looked at investing in the other major UK banks. In all I was
prepared to risk 10% of my portfolio on four banking stocks.
Then the figures came out. They were worse than expected with GDP falling by 1.5%.
Barclays dropped 15% almost immediately, taking it to the lowest level I had ever seen. I
waited for the market to stabilise and prepared to trade. Then I hesitated. Everything had
happened as expected – I should go ahead and buy. But what if this went wrong? What if
the financial industry really was imploding, as everyone else seemed to think?



                                                                                            1
Systematic Trading



Panicking, I quickly changed my orders, knocking a zero off each so that only 1% of my
portfolio was at risk. It was one of the biggest mistakes of my investing career.


FIGURE 1: GOOD TIMING, TINY POSITION, WHEN TRADING BARCLAYS SHARES IN 2009.
BARCLAYS SHARE PRICE.




Source: Authors records.



As figure 1 shows, that day I bought Barclays for 53p a share, and just a few months later
I sold my shares for an average of £2.50 each. Although Barclays was the top performer,
my other bank shares also multiplied in value. I had made a decent profit but my own
panic prevented me from making much, much more.
I had planned carefully and meticulously, done everything right, and then at the last
moment let my emotions get the better of me.


September 2008
Just a few months earlier I had been sitting in the same office and at the same desk. But
on this particular day I had no time to think about my own money. The US government
were variously trying to rescue, or had given up on, investment bank Lehman Brothers,
insurer AIG, and mortgage agencies Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae. Our computer trading


2
                                                                                 Introduction


systems continued to run smoothly whilst the markets were in the middle of the most
savage moves of a generation. But we had other things to worry about.
Although we were profitable could we trust the banks and brokers with whom we
had deposited our cash? What if our clients redeemed their investments to cover holes
elsewhere in their portfolio – could we pay them? What if the whole global financial
system completely seized up? We were terrified. Perhaps we should just liquidate
everything, put our money into gold bars, and wait for the storm to pass. At the very least
we considered reducing the risk our computers wanted to take, perhaps by half. One of
our main competitors had already done exactly that.
After yet another crisis meeting, where we decided to take no action for now, I left the
meeting room and returned to my desk. As I sat down a colleague came over and started
typing on my keyboard.
“You’ll definitely want to see this,” he said. He pressed return, and a live estimate of
today’s profitability appeared on my screen. For the first time in our firm’s history it
showed a ten digit number. We had made over a billion dollars in a single day. Our
computer system had stuck to its preprogrammed set of trading rules and mechanically
exploited the market moves almost to perfection, whilst terrified humans had discussed
closing it down.
Humans are better than computers at complex intellectual tasks. But as these two stories
show, our emotions prevent us from fully utilising this intelligence. The solution is to use
systems to make trading decisions.


Why you should start system trading now
Many people have been using systems to trade in one form or another for decades, but
they are still a small minority. Although there are several relatively large systematic hedge
funds, including the fund I used to work for, significantly less than 10% of actively
managed global assets is fully systematically traded. But the investment world is changing
and now is a better time than ever before to consider trading or investing with systems.
Firstly, institutional investors like pension funds have moved away from expensive
active management, including hedge funds, to cheaper passive management. With
passive management there is no ‘skill’ to pay for, less trading and so lower costs. In a low
inflation environment active management fees of 1% or more are an intolerable drag on
performance, even without the extra 20% of performance charged by hedge funds.
Passive indexing, buying shares or bonds in fixed weights, is effectively a form of
systematic trading, albeit a very simple one. I’ll show how this concept can be extended
and improved in the asset allocating investor example.
The returns from hedge funds can be separated into beta – what you can get by tracking
the market, alpha – the skill the hedge fund manager has, and alternative beta. An

                                                                                           3
Systematic Trading



example of alternative beta is the additional return you can get from buying stocks with
low price-to-earnings (PE) ratios, and selling those with high PE ratios – the equity value
premium.
Alternative beta doesn’t need skill, but it can’t be earned just by buying and holding
shares. However it can be produced by following relatively simple rules. Some collective
funds have been created to allow investors to get access to alternative beta, but they
are still relatively expensive. Institutions should seriously consider using systematic rule-
based trading to create in-house cheap alternative beta portfolios. The staunch systems
trader example shows how this can be achieved.
It’s also easier than ever for amateurs to invest in a systematic way. Technology has
revolutionised the financial industry. In the past amateur investors had to rely on
yesterday’s newspapers for share prices and news. Now it’s possible to download historical
price data for free from numerous websites.
Computing power has continued to fall in price and you can run quite sophisticated
strategies on $30 Raspberry Pi micro computers. Instead of using expensive full service
stockbrokers to place trades, cheap retail brokers allow you to trade at commission levels
which are a fraction of what was possible 20 years ago.
There has been an explosion in the availability of numerous retail passive funds. In
particular a vast array of dirt cheap exchange traded funds has appeared, allowing the
passive tracking of almost every conceivable financial index. It’s much easier to buy and
sell securities covering a wider variety of asset classes and countries than in the past.
But there have been other developments that are a mixed blessing. Derivatives like
contracts for difference and spread bets allow amateurs and professionals to use leverage
more easily. But unless you are careful these can quickly send your account value to zero,
or even below. In the semi-automatic trader example I show how discretionary traders
can trade in a relatively safe and controlled way by using a systematic framework to
manage their risk.
The offering of retail stockbrokers has been radically improved. They give you access
to websites and apps that make trading as easy as ordering from Amazon. You can find
brokers that allow you to submit orders automatically from software, making fully
automated trading a possibility. A more recent development is the appearance of online
platforms which allow you to easily implement automated strategies.3
These are great tools, but they are offered solely to encourage more buying and selling.
You should never forget that your broker makes more money when you trade frequently,
whilst you lose out unless the extra trades are sufficiently profitable. I’ll show in this book
how costly overtrading is, and how you to avoid it.

3. I’m less keen on the appearance of ‘social trading’ websites where you ‘follow’ someone else’s trading
strategy. It makes no sense to let an unregulated, unqualified and probably inexperienced stranger manage
your money; with minimal, statistically insignificant, evidence that they are capable of doing so.

4
                                                                                Introduction


There are now many back-testing software packages available. These allow you to test
potential strategies to see which made the most hypothetical money in the past. As I will
explain in later chapters if you’re not careful this will often lead to losing actual money
in the present.
Finally, there are many books and websites containing trading systems, advice and
guidance for trading, of which more in a moment. So there is no shortage of tools and
advice to begin investing systematically, although you do need to be careful as they are
lethal if not used safely.


It’s dangerous out there
Imagine for a moment you have just walked into a car dealership. Whilst admiring the
vehicle on display you are approached by a slick suited salesman.
   “This looks great, but it’s a bit small for me. What other models do you have?” you
   ask.
   “Actually this is the only model we make,” he replies.
   “Okay... Would you recommend the convertible, or is the fuel consumption too
   high?”
   “We don’t have a convertible.”
   “Right. How much extra would it cost to get alloy wheels and air conditioning?”
   “Nothing. We don’t do them.”
   “Does it come in red?”
   “No. Just black.”
You’d be pretty surprised. In reality a new car buyer is offered so many options that the
possible permutations usually run into millions! Car dealers can do this because cars are
modular – made up of individual components which can be easily changed. When buying
a new car we can specify different engines or add options like a fancy stereo. Later on we
can still change certain parts like the tyres.
Now consider the large number of books and websites describing various trading systems.
Many are too vague to be considered systematic but others include quite detailed rules.
Nearly all of these publicly available trading systems are not modular, and can’t be easily
adapted. You don’t have the opportunity to ask the author questions like:
“I notice you used a 20-day moving average here. When would it make sense to use a
30-day moving average? You say we should put 2.5% of our capital into each trade. Why?
What will happen if I put 5% in? I like your trading rules, but how would I use those in
my own position management framework? How can I use this to trade gasoline futures?”


                                                                                          5
Systematic Trading



I will answer these questions, and many more, later in the book. Now let’s return to the
imaginary conversation with our hypothetical car dealer.
    “How fast does it go?”
    “It does exactly 150.6 miles an hour.”
    “Wow! I bet it drinks fuel at that speed. What’s the fuel economy like at 55?”
    “No you weren’t listening. It always does precisely 150.6. No faster or slower.”
    “Isn’t that a little… dangerous?”
    “Well it was fine on the manufacturer’s test track.”
Once again consider the many publicly available trading systems. Many advocate trading
extremely quickly, holding positions for only a few days, minutes or even seconds. In
many markets traded by amateur investors that will lead to extremely high trading costs.
Frighteningly the majority of trading systems also suggest holding sizable positions which
are far too risky unless you know in advance you will be a brilliant trader who is also very
lucky. Using these systems is like driving at 200mph and hoping you won’t crash or run
out of fuel.
To take an example, one expert on spread betting proposes putting at most 10%, but
usually 5%, of your capital into each trade. Sensibly he suggests you diversify, holding
several positions in different markets at once. He then proposes using a particular type of
trading rule which means positions would be held on average for about a week.4
This sounds safe, but should actually come with a significant health warning. To overcome
the trading costs this would generate on an index spread bet and break even you would
need to make a return of 83% a year.5 Worse still, to avoid a high chance of losing most
of your entire investment you’d need to average 256% a year after costs; implying an
annualised pre-cost return of 339%!6
Thinking that you can overcome these odds is a sign of serious overconfidence, the main
weakness of all traders and investors. I will explain why these systems are dangerous, and
how to make your trading safer.


Why you should read this book
I don’t believe there is any magic system that will automatically make you huge profits,
and you should be wary of anyone who says otherwise, especially if they want to sell
it to you. Instead success in systematic trading is mostly down to avoiding common
mistakes such as over complicating your system, being too optimistic about likely returns,


4. This is a real system, but I will not identify the author. It is by no means the worst system I have seen.
5. If you are interested I explain why on page 192.
6. The calculation for this is on page 151.

6
                                                                                 Introduction


taking excessive risks, and trading too often. I will help you avoid these errors. This won’t
guarantee vast returns, but it will make failure less likely.
My main aim isn’t just to give you a single predefined system for trading, but to provide
you with a modular framework which can be adapted to meet your needs. Part three
describes the framework in detail. Just like you can choose different engines and tyres
on a car, my framework includes options for different trading rules and position sizing
calculations.
I haven’t just pulled a bunch of components out of a parts bin. Each element of the
framework has been carefully designed with months of careful research, built on many
years of experience. I’ll explain the available options, which I prefer, and why.
Just like cars can be modified I will show you how to incorporate your own trading rules
and change other parts of the framework. I will warn you of the dangers of being too
aggressive, which will result in your bank account blowing up like an over-tuned engine.
I’ll discuss the correct amount to bet on a particular trade, and how long to hold positions
for.
In part four I show how to create trading strategies for each of the three example groups
I mentioned in the preface. Sticking with the car analogy you can create a sturdy family
car for asset allocating investing, an experimental kit car for semi-automatic trading,
or a sporty two seater convertible of a trading system if you are a staunch systems trader.
But before you get your fingers greasy you need to do some preparation. So the first part
of the book which follows is all about theory, and in the second part I explain how to use
your tools safely.




                                                                                            7
PART ONE.


Theory
Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain

H    UMAN MINDS CAN DO WONDERFUL THINGS, BUT ARE DEEPLY
     flawed when making financial decisions. In this chapter I explore economic theories
about human behaviour, and why systematic trading and investing makes sense. I also
show how our irrationality can interfere with the design of systematic strategies.


Chapter overview

 Humans should be great            The research that tells us why humans make bad decisions.
 traders, but...

 Simple trading rules              The dumb systems that are better at investing and trading than
                                   clever humans.

 Sticking to the plan              Why you must be committed to your systems for them to work.

 Good system design                Avoiding the human failings which can still be dangerous when
                                   designing systematic trading strategies.




Humans should be great traders, but...
Why do we need to trade or invest in a systematic fashion? What is wrong with using our
own intuition to trade in a discretionary way? After all our brains have an astonishing
ability to absorb and react to complex data, like those we see in financial markets. In my
own Barclays trade described in the introduction I did analysis that would be virtually
impossible to replicate with a systematic rule. But a simple rule would have been more
successful than I was.7

7. If in 2009 I had developed the idea of semi-automatic trading then I could have taken more advantage
of my uncharacteristically brilliant analysis, by putting the trade on in a framework which controlled my
risk properly.
                                                                                                      11
Systematic Trading



Unfortunately there have been many other times when a systematic strategy would have
made better decisions than I did. For example in 2004 I bought some shares in UK
oil company BP. They quickly rose about 5% and I sold them for a small profit. They
subsequently rallied to a much higher level. I resolved never to sell too quickly again.
Then in late 2009 I decided to recycle some of my Barclays profits into buying BP. Initially
they went from £5 to over £6. But in April 2010 one of BP’s drilling rigs exploded in
devastating fashion, killing 11 people. The shares started to fall, and a month later they
were back at £5. Scarred by my earlier experience I hung on, convinced they would
rebound. I finally sold at £3, which turned out to be the bottom.
I got it wrong both times. Was this just bad luck – a BP jinx? Am I a particularly poor
trader, or is this evidence of a deeper problem with human psychology?
In fact despite their awesome complexity human brains like mine, and yours, are
fundamentally flawed. In the jargon they are subject to cognitive biases which result
in irrational behaviour. These instincts are so strong they mostly overwhelm any natural
advantage that humans should have over simple decision-making rules.To see why this
happens we need to understand how economists have tried to model and understand
human behaviour.

The death of rational economic man
When the ideas of classical finance were developed in the 1950s economists assumed
that people behaved in a purely rational way, resulting in perfectly efficient markets.
Over time many apparent anomalies in this theory were discovered. But these were
easily dismissed by the academic establishment as irrelevant, statistically insignificant
or explainable through some combination of risk factors. Crucially nobody was able to
come up with an alternative model that was as self-consistent and elegant as the efficient
markets hypothesis.
From the 1980s onwards the field was penetrated by researchers from the discipline of
psychology. For these experts in the human mind, the economist’s framework of pure
rationalism must have been highly amusing. A key insight these academic interlopers
brought was that our brains are loaded with baggage from the distant past.
Parts of our grey matter are still hardwired for survival in a hostile environment where
quick thinking was better than slow thoughtful consideration. As a result we have deep-
rooted instincts that make it extremely difficult to behave in the rational way that classical
finance expects. The new field that the interlopers created was behavioural finance, and it
did have its own unifying model: prospect theory.




12
                                                                     Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain


Why we run losses and stop out profits
Prospect theory explains why investors get it wrong when confronted with certain trading
decisions, such as whether to sell out of a position which is now showing a loss. Most
people show the greatest reluctance to take losses, as I did in 2010 with BP.8
This has been catchily described as “get-evenitis” by Hersh Shefrin.9 This aversion to
taking losses is a very powerful instinct. Humans do not seem to view a paper loss as real
until it has been crystallised, so we can postpone the painful feeling of losing money. We
are also reluctant to admit that we made a mistake with our initial purchase. Selling is an
admission of failure.
Conversely, if a position has risen in value we are happy to take profits and sell quickly,
as in my 2004 BP trade. The main motivation behind selling positions at a small profit
appears to be to minimise regret. If the stock fell back after reaching a new high we would
castigate ourselves for not taking profits earlier. Selling also confirms that our initial buy
decision was correct. We hunger to get that confirmation as quickly as possible.
Both of these effects are at odds with classical financial theory, which says that people’s
actions and preferences for risk are unrelated to whether they have made paper profits or
losses. In contrast prospect theory says we take more risks in a losing position to get even,
but we want less risk when winning, preferring a quick and certain gain to a chance of
losing our profits.
Unfortunately taking small profits and letting losses run is almost always a bad idea. I can
show you this by back-testing a trading system which mimics someone taking profits on
small rises, but allowing losses to grow larger before cutting – an ‘early profit taker’.10 A
back-test shows how profitable this rule would have been if it had been run in the past.
Figure 2 shows part of the back-test and illustrates how the rule would have traded treasury
futures during summer 2011, when the USA’s sovereign debt rating was downgraded
causing a counter intuitive rally. It sells and goes short in early June on a small profit and
then misses the subsequent rise in prices.




8. For more academic detail see for example Terence Odean, ‘Are Investors Reluctant To Realize Their
Losses?’, Journal of Finance 1998.
9. Shefrin 2007, Beyond Greed and Fear. I highly recommend this book for a clear overview of behavioural
finance, despite its age. In academic circles this is the ‘disposition effect’ described in Shefrin and Statmen,
‘The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers too long: theory and evidence’, Journal of Finance
1985.
10. This is based on the ‘A and B’ system defined in appendix B with parameters A = 5 and B = 20.

                                                                                                             13
Systematic Trading



FIGURE 2: EARLY PROFIT TAKER MISSES THE 2011 RALLY IN US 10 YEAR TREASURY BONDS




I compared this to the results from employing the opposite strategy – ‘an early loss taker’.11
Figure 3 shows this rule did much better during the same time period.



     CONCEPT: BACK-TEST
     To run a back-test you take historic data and calculate how a trading strategy
     would have behaved, and the profits or losses it could have made, had you been
     using it in the past.
     Suppose you thought that buying the pound/dollar FX rate at 1.5 and selling it at
     1.8 was a profitable strategy. You could take the history of the FX rate and then see
     what trades, and any profits, you would have made historically if you really had
     bought and sold according to this rule.
     Back-testing is an invaluable tool for creating new trading rules. But when misused
     it can be dangerous, as we’ll discover in chapter three, ‘Fitting’.




11. This is also based on the ‘A and B’ system in appendix B with A = 20 and B = 5.

14
                                                         Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain


FIGURE 3: EARLY LOSS TAKER STAYS IN THE 2011 US BOND RALLY UNTIL BEING STOPPED OUT




When I back-tested these two rules on 31 futures contracts I found that the early loss
taker beat the early profit taker in 27 of them. Tests done on similar rules, across a wide
variety of asset classes, confirm this finding. The early profit taker rule, which mimics our
natural instincts, does worse than a rule which does the opposite.

Gamblers anonymous
Some of my relatives equate trading to high stakes gambling; an attitude I am usually
quick to dismiss. But there may be some truth to it, at least in certain situations. To
understand why it’s worth knowing that certain types of gambling are more addictive
than others, probably due to certain factors which reinforce the stimulation the brain
receives during play.
There appear to be three main factors associated with the most addictive games. Firstly
there should be an illusion of control, which encourages the perception of skill. Lottery
players often prefer to pick their own numbers. Secondly, the game should include
apparent near misses; frequent chances of almost winning the biggest prize. These are
especially potent if you also receive lower value prizes, as in lotteries and slot machines.
Finally, the game should be rapid and continuous to give a constant flow of stimulation.
Buying a lottery ticket is not as addictive as an instant lottery or scratch card where the
result is known immediately.



                                                                                           15
Systematic Trading



The illusion of control is present with all forms of active investing. Ironically the feeling
of control is almost absent when investing systematically, which is one reason why many
people find it difficult to utilise this trading method.
But the near miss and rapidity factors are clearly more likely to be associated with very
frequent ‘day trading’. As we’ll discover later in the book it is extremely difficult to make
profits when trading quickly, and only a small percentage of day traders manage to cover
their costs, and make both a reasonable income and decent return on capital. Yet many
amateurs feel compelled to try, and to continue trying, to beat the odds. Their frantic
churning of trades is not so very different from the addict spending hours in front of a
slot machine.
This particular brain deficiency leads to financial decisions that aren’t just poor, but
potentially life destroying.


Simple trading rules
Given there are flaws in the human brain which seriously affect our decision-making
ability, what can we do about it? Easy: we should use systematic trading rules to make
our decisions. These can help mitigate our own serious flaws, but they can also allow us to
exploit the weaknesses that other human traders still have; their cognitive biases which
result in behavioural anomalies in the market.
For example the early loss taker rule I mentioned above isn’t just correcting our human
instinct to take profits early and hang on to losses. It earns extra returns when other
people persist in doing the opposite.
Personally I find it very reassuring to have explanations based on cognitive biases of why
certain trading rules are consistently profitable. This gives me confidence that what I am
seeing isn’t just a statistical blip in a back-test. It means that the relevant rules should
continue to work unless human behaviour changes radically. I’ll return to this theme in
chapter two – ‘Systematic Trading Rules’.


Sticking to the plan
There is no point running a systematic trading strategy unless you can stick to it. Suppose
you make a New Year’s resolution to follow the early loss taker rule. Like most such
resolutions it will probably prove hard to keep. When a long position in gold futures hits
the 5 cent stop loss the early loss taker rule has set you will probably start making excuses:
     “The fundamentals are good. They haven’t changed. I will just hold on a bit longer.
     Just this once. If it goes down 10 cents – which it won’t – then I will definitely sell.”
You might not even close at a 10 cent loss, kicking yourself for not selling earlier, and
continue to hang on for the rebound that never comes, until the pain is unbearable and

16
                                                                Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain


you close out. A small profit would also prove irresistible, with its own litany of excuses
why you should deviate from the rule, just this once.
I call this process of interference by our internal monologue meddling. Meddling is due
to the biggest cognitive bias of all: overconfidence. We think we are cleverer than the
trading system and we are. We think we know more than the trading system and we do;
the system focuses on a narrow set of quantifiable inputs, whilst we can analyse many
kinds of complex information. We think being clever and knowing more implies we will
make better decisions – but we usually don’t, thanks to cognitive biases.
To stop meddling with our trading systems we require what economists call a commitment
mechanism. The idea of a commitment mechanism is several thousand years old. One of
its earliest appearances is in the story of Odysseus. The mythical Greek wanted to hear the
songs of the Sirens without endangering himself or his vessel. So he ordered his crew to
stuff their ears with beeswax, tie him to the mast and dutifully ignore his inevitable cries
to steer the ship on to the rocks.
A modern example of this is given in Victor Niederhoffer’s book Education of a Speculator.
At this point in the story hedge fund manager Victor has a large long position in silver
futures. We join him in early 1980 when the Hunt brothers, who had been squeezing the
market upwards, are about to capitulate, which will cause the price to drop:
   “I decided to set my loss limit at 50% of my winnings... The model story on this
   point is Odysseus... I locked myself inside a racquetball court instead of tying
   myself to a ship’s mast. I issued instructions to my assistant and future wife, Susan.
   ‘Do not listen to my entreaties if I wish to double further. If the losses reach
   50% of the winnings, reduce my positions by one-half. If I beg to be released, sell
   everything out.’…
   Some rumors about liquidation by the Hunts had hit the fan... I immediately
   placed a call to Susan ‘Untie me. Disregard everything I said before’ … My faithful
   companion followed my original directions.”
Susan closed the entire position and Victor lived to fight another day. But how can we
ensure we stick to our strategies without the use of ropes or future wives?12

Trading systems must be objective
To be committed you must have an objective trading system. Many systems aren’t objective
and require some discretion to apply. A highly subjective rule would be something like
‘Sell for small losses, and hold on to large profit making positions’. This is similar in spirit
to the early loss taker rule defined earlier, but it’s much too vague.

12. This comment isn’t intended to imply that all investors and traders are unmarried heterosexual men.
However, if your partner is a man rather than a woman you should be wary of using them as a commitment
mechanism, as they may make things worse; research shows that women generally make better investment
decisions.

                                                                                                    17
Systematic Trading



At the first sign of a loss it’s likely you will start to redefine what constitutes ‘small’ to
justify not selling. Few systems are that poorly defined, but many have ‘rules’ in them
which allow for a significant degree of subjective interpretation. Technical analysts rarely
agree on which patterns exist in a particular chart, and what should be done with them.
Creating a purely objective system is a powerful commitment mechanism. If you have a
subjective system and your instinct goes against it, then you’ll soon be bending the rules.
But if everything is clearly defined it creates a line in the sand beyond which any deviation
is obvious. You cannot fool yourself that you are following a system if you blatantly ignore
objective rules.
Furthermore we can only produce back-tests for purely objective systems. You will see
why this is important later in the chapter.

Automation – the use of dogs in finance and engineering
Another advantage of objective systems is that they can be automated, and automation is a
good commitment mechanism. You can’t automate subjective systems because computers
cannot eyeball trend lines on charts; they need firm statements like ‘Buy if the 20 day
moving average is above the 40 day’. They cannot interpret commandments like ‘Sell
once the pattern is triggered unless there is a firm sign of bullish volume’ without a clear
definition of both the pattern and the meaning of bullish volume.
So an objective system is one which a computer can run. But it does not mean a computer
must run it. You can run many trading strategies using pencil and paper, or relatively
simple spreadsheets, to calculate trades which you then execute manually. Certain
kinds of systems involving complex rules, faster trading frequencies or trading in large
numbers of instruments13 would be very time-consuming, or impossible, to run without
automation. But for simpler systems automation isn’t necessary. Full automation is also
problematic for discretionary semi-automatic traders, although they could automate
their position and risk management framework once they’ve made their trading decisions
manually.
Furthermore automation doesn’t stop meddling. Firstly, consider the degree of automation.
Having a system which requires a human to do the actual execution of automatically
generated trades is still prone to meddling. If the process is completely automated from
end to end then interference is harder. There is an old joke that the best systematic trading
setup consists of a computer, a man and a dog. The computer runs a fully automated
strategy, the man feeds the dog, and the dog bites the man if he touches the computer.14



13. Instrument is my term for something that you trade or invest in. So a share of BP is an instrument, as is
a corn future, and so is a spread bet on the yen/dollar exchange rate.
14. This joke evolved from earlier jokes involving various kinds of hardware rather than trading systems. It is
generally attributed either to management theorist Warren Bennis, or to employees of Bell labs.

18
                                                                   Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain


Secondly, any good automated software would have ways to override it in an emergency. If
you desperately want to meddle then there will be frequent ‘emergencies’. Automation is
of little help unless you have faith in your trading rules. A system which is fully automated
but not completely trusted is potentially lethal.15 Any sane person would be tempted to
shut it down at the first sign of trouble. So automation aids commitment, but it must be
done with a well designed system in which you have full confidence.


Good system design
So what is a well designed system? How can you make something which you can trust,
commit to and won’t meddle with, regardless of whether it is automated or not?
It is much easier to trust a system which is objective. Firstly, because it is transparent: you
know given some particular data exactly what the positions should be. Secondly, you can
back-test an objective system over history. This will give you an indication of what its
past behaviour was, and how it should trade in the future. For example suppose a system
typically lost around 5% on one of every ten trading days in the simulated past of your
back-test. You shouldn’t worry if in real trading you lose 5% every couple of weeks.16
As well as requiring systems to be objective I also prefer those that are relatively simple,
transparent and based on underlying ideas,17 such as my previous hypothesis that prospect
theory explains the success of the early loss taking rule. Transparency is important for
gaining trust in trading systems, just as it is in politics. In the next chapter I’ll explain in
more detail why I prefer systems whose performance and behaviour can be explained.
In addition to these positive attributes there are also three significant pitfalls to avoid
when designing trading systems: over-fitting, overtrading and over-betting.

Over-fitting
A new trading system does not arrive out of the ether. It has to be designed and developed
by an actual, probably overconfident,18 person. It is all too easy for that person to make
design mistakes due to those same cognitive biases they are trying to escape from by
trading systematically.


15. The HAL computer in Arthur C. Clarke’s 2001: A Space Odyssey is a good example of what happens when
you take automation too far and then don’t trust the system.
16. In fact by using my framework you can make predictions about likely losses even in situations when you
can’t back-test, such as when you’re a semi-automatic trader not using systematic trading rules.
17. Compared to say a system which has been built purely by back-testing a large number of trading rules
and picking the best regardless of whether it can be explained, a process sometimes called data mining. I’ll
return to this distinction in the next chapter.
18. It’s not just trading system designers who are overconfident. There is a significant amount of academic
research showing examples of overconfidence in discretionary finance, for example amongst equity analysts
and macroeconomic forecasters.

                                                                                                         19
Systematic Trading



Firstly ‘narrative fallacy’: our brains are great at seeing patterns where there are none.
Whilst developing trading rules there is often a fitting process during which the best
rules are selected by looking at back-test results. If we’re not careful the rules selected
will fit the data too well. They will be highly tuned to one set of market conditions and
perform worse in actual trading than a simpler rule would. The system will be over-fitted.
Narrative fallacy means we have a tendency to see more predictability in historic asset
prices than really existed and so we’re naturally drawn to over-fitted trading rules. I’ll
return to this problem in chapter three, ‘Fitting’.
Second bias, and perhaps the most serious of all: overconfidence. This manifests itself in
a lack of diversification. Surveys of individual portfolios find that most amateur investors
have relatively few securities in their portfolio, with a bias towards their home country,
and also lack diversification across asset classes.
You might think that experts, with access to sophisticated quantitative tools, wouldn’t
make these mistakes. Unfortunately they often do. This happens when they don’t
consider the considerable uncertainty in expected asset returns. The most commonly used
optimisation models assume they know the pattern of returns precisely. Small changes to
the model inputs will produce extreme portfolios with all their eggs in one or two baskets.
The result can be just as bad or worse than the portfolios of mere amateurs.
In practice many experts fiddle with the raw output of optimisations until they end up
reflecting their own expectations of what the result should have been! I will discuss this
further in chapter four, ‘Portfolio Allocation’.

Overtrading
People are highly overconfident about their own abilities relative to others. This is another
cognitive bias: illusory superiority. For example nearly all drivers consider themselves
above average, a theoretical impossibility and also highly unlikely given the number of
deaths annually from road accidents.
Both amateur investors and professional managers have a tendency to trade too
frequently.19 There are extra costs involved in trading more often. Overtrading suggests
overconfidence in your own relative ability to overcome the higher hurdle of bigger costs.
As I pointed out above, frequent trading can also be addictive and lead to behaviour
which is indistinguishable from problem gambling.
When designing trading systems if you over-fit you will end up with systems that perform
unrealistically well in back-tests, and wrongly assume that returns will easily be high
enough to overcome trading costs.



19. For academic research on this see Odean and Barber, ‘The common stock investment performance of
individual investors’, 1998 working paper.

20
                                                                   Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain


Over betting
It will be extremely difficult to refrain from meddling if you’re worried about wiping out
your capital. Take the system I mentioned above with a one-in-ten chance of a 5% daily
loss. If that was ten times leveraged you would have a 10% chance of losing half your
capital on any given day. Most sane people would panic after losing 50% on one day, and
start meddling like crazy.
Unfortunately over betting is endemic amongst amateur investors with easy access to
leverage through derivatives like spread bets. If your confidence is unbounded you can
bet the maximum that your broker allows you to. Potentially this could be a ten-fold
leverage on an individual equity bet, equating to an annual standard deviation of returns
of around 200%. This is nuts.20



    CONCEPT: STANDARD DEVIATION
    The standard deviation is a measure of how dispersed some data is around its
    average; it’s a measure of risk. The precise formula is in the glossary, but in most
    cases you’ll use a spreadsheet formula or software to calculate it.
    Standard deviations are often used to describe the dispersion of the returns of an
    asset, or profits from a trading system. I use the term volatility as a shorthand for
    standard deviation of returns. One unit of standard deviation is also sometimes
    called a sigma.
    In this book we’ll usually be dealing with daily returns and using daily volatilities,
    but it’s often useful to think about the annualised standard deviation – how much
    deviation we expect to see over a year.
    Standard deviation doesn’t increase linearly, but with the square root of time. Over
    the roughly 256 business days in a year you’d expect annual standard deviation to be
    larger by the square root of 256, or 16.21 So you multiply daily standard deviations
    by 16 to get the annualised version, or divide by 16 to go from annualised to daily.
    In contrast to go from average daily returns to annualised average returns you just
    multiply by the number of days in a year, or 256. Then to go from annualised to
    daily you divide by 256.
    Equities have an annualised standard deviation of about 20% a year. Bonds tend to
    be safer, depending on their maturity. A typical two year bond has an annualised
    sigma of around 1.5% a year, and a ten year bond would be more like 8%.


20. At the time of writing some UK providers of FX spread bets offer leverage of up to 500 times. That isn’t
nuts, it’s clinically insane.
21. I’m making an assumption here that adjacent returns don’t influence each other, or in the jargon of
statistics they have zero autocorrelation.

                                                                                                         21
Systematic Trading



     We often assume our returns have a particular type of distribution. A distribution
     is just a way of describing the pattern of your data. A common distribution I use is
     the Gaussian normal distribution. If returns are Gaussian normal, then the mean
     and standard deviation alone are sufficient to say how likely certain returns will be.
     If your daily returns are Gaussian normal then you will see movements one sigma
     or less around the average about 68% of the time, and returns two sigma or less
     about 95% of the time. In 2.5% of days you’d see a change more than two sigma
     above the average. You’d also see a return which is two sigma worse than the average
     2.5% of the time. The Gaussian normal distribution is symmetric.
     Let’s consider the 200% annualised standard deviation mentioned above. 200% a
     year translates into 12.5% a day if you divide by the square root of time, 16. For
     the average daily return even if you’re making an optimistic 200% a year, after
     you’ve divided by 256 you earn just 0.8% per day. A plus one sigma return would
     be 12.5% above the average of 0.8%, or 13.3%. A one sigma loss would be 12.5%
     below the average, or -11.7%.

     FIGURE 4: SCARILY YOU CAN EXPECT TO LOSE 40% IN ONE DAY, EVERY THREE YEARS,
     FOR A TRADING SYSTEM WITH 200% ANNUALISED STANDARD DEVIATION OF RETURNS,
     AND AVERAGE RETURNS OF 200% PER YEAR




     You’ll see returns between -11.7% and +13.3% a day around 68% of the time, and
     between -24.2% and +25.8% a day 95% of the time. Around 2.5% of the time
     you’d see losses of more than 24.2% a day. That’s quite a hefty daily loss which


22
                                                     Chapter One. The Flawed Human Brain


you’d get every couple of months. And as figure 4 shows about once every three
years you’d lose three sigma or 37.2% in one day!
Scarily that’s probably still optimistic because the normal distribution tends to
underestimate the chance of really bad returns. According to the normal distribution
we should get daily falls of more than 4 sigma about once a century. But from 1914
to 2014 the US Dow Jones index fell by more than 4 sigma around 30 times!
You or your investors need to be comfortable with the losses you’re likely to make.
The size of your positions must reflect the amount of risk you can handle. I’ll
explain this in more detail in chapter nine, ‘Volatility Targeting’.




                                                                                       23
Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules

A    TRADING RULE IS A SYSTEMATIC WAY OF PREDICTING PRICE
     movements. Trading rules are a core component of any trading system, so how can
you find trading rules that will work? Why do they work? What styles of trading are
available? Finally, how successful should you expect trading rules to be?


Chapter overview

 What makes a good        Some key elements that make a trading rule more likely to be
 trading rule             successful.

 When trading rules       Reasons why a trading rule which worked in back-test may not
 don’t work               work in practice when actually traded.

 Why are certain rules    Explanations for why profit making rules exist, to help you work
 profitable?              out if that profitability is likely to be repeatable.

 Classifying trading      The main ways in which you can classify rules into trading styles,
 styles                   and the important characteristics each style has.

 Achievable Sharpe        What are realistic Sharpe ratios to expect?
 ratios




                                                                                           25
Systematic Trading



What makes a good trading rule

Staunch systems trader
This section mostly relates to how trading rules are fitted. This is less applicable
to asset allocating investors and semi-automatic traders, and they can skip to
‘Why are certain rules profitable?’


It is carefully built from ideas or data
Systematic trading assumes the future will be like the past. Hence you should create rules
that would have worked historically, and hope that they will continue to work.
But there are at least two different ways to find rules that made money in the past. One
common method, which I call data first, is to analyse some data, find some profitable
patterns and create some trading rules to exploit them. This is sometimes called data
mining. The alternative, ideas first, is to come up with an idea, then create a rule,
which is then tested on data to see if it works.22 Here is Leda Braga, head of hedge fund
Systematica, describing ideas first in an interview with Bloomberg in February 2015:
     “There’s a creative moment when you think of a hypothesis, maybe it’s that interest
     rate data derives currency rates. So we think about that first before mining the
     data. We don’t mine the data to come up with ideas.”
Designing an ideas first system is like saying: “I want to design a system that captures this
source of return. I hope this source is still around in the future.”
Whereas for a data first system: “Here is a system that was profitable in the past given
the patterns in the market (which I won’t try and explain or understand). I hope these
patterns persist in the future.”




22. There is a third method which is to use an idea which you cannot or will not test on historical data.
Strictly speaking, this wouldn’t be systematic trading.

26
                                                             Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules



 Advantages of ideas first                      Advantages of data first

 If an idea works no further potentially        There will be a bias with ideas first to testing
 dangerous fitting is required.                 things that you know will work, either because
                                                of ‘market lore’ or academic studies. This is a
                                                form of implicit over-fitting.

 Any fitting will probably be done in a small   With ideas first it is tempting to try a large
 subset of alternatives.                        number of ideas to find the ones that work.
                                                This is definitely over-fitting.

 You tend to get simpler and more intuitive     In data first all the fitting is explicit, so the
 trading rules with ideas first.                degree of over-fitting can be controlled.

 You can construct rules that make intuitive    A compelling theory or story does not guarantee
 sense, with a story behind them.               that the source of returns is repeatable, and
                                                could give a false sense of security. This is the
                                                narrative fallacy I mentioned in Chapter 1.

 It’s easier to classify the trading rule and   Clever data analysis might unearth novel
 work out where its profits are coming from.    strategies that were previously unknown.




In my experience consistently profitable trading comes out of careful research, done by
thoughtful and knowledgeable people, who seek to understand where their profits come
from. The loss making systematic trading I’ve seen has often been the result of haphazard
data mining, done without any consideration of the reasons why a rule might have
appeared profitable in the past or might not be in the future.
That experience, combined with my preference for things I can trust and understand,
means I favour the ideas first method. This usually results in intuitive, simpler and more
transparent rules. As long as a small number of ideas are tested over-fitting is less likely.
In the next chapter, ‘Fitting’, I focus on ideas first testing because it is simpler and does
not require sophisticated techniques to implement safely.
But in some situations the data first process could be better; for example in high frequency
trading where there is plenty of data, rules can be refitted regularly and novel ideas are
more likely to be found as market structure evolves.
You should be aware of the strengths and weaknesses of your preferred method and use
it appropriately.




                                                                                                27
Systematic Trading



Explainable profits
Understanding why trading rules make money is very important. If you know why
something was profitable in the past you can also have some idea of whether profits will
continue, or if and when the rule might fail.
With an ideas first approach you can easily explain why a strategy was profitable, since
the explanation is inherent in the original idea. For example you might have tested a trend
following rule, which you think makes money because of cognitive biases explained by
prospect theory.
With data first any explanation has to follow the fitting process. You first examine how
a rule behaves and then infer what might be causing the effect. The more complex a data
driven trading rule is the harder it will be to explain.
There is however a danger in seeking out explanations. Remember the narrative fallacy,
another cognitive bias: humans like stories. We’re more likely to believe in rules which
have convincing explanations, even if their performance doesn’t stand up to statistical
scrutiny. To trust a trading rule I like to have both a good story and a rigorous back-test.

Intuitively understandable behaviour
A strategy that is intuitive is much easier to trust. If in advance of an earnings announcement
you see Unilever’s equity price rising a trend following system ought to be buying. If the
strategy sold instead that might be a cause for concern and you would check for bad data
or software bugs. Usually though you’d see what was expected and be able to relax.
A complicated system might buy or sell when prices moved higher, depending on the
exact pattern. This would make its behaviour less obvious and more unpredictable.

As simple as possible
It is much easier to explain the profitability and behaviour of simple trading rules, those
with few moving parts and no weird interactions. Ideas first rules should be simple unless
you begin with a very convoluted idea, or over complicate it to get a more profitable
back-test, neither of which is recommended.
Data first rules can be very simple or extremely complicated, depending on how many
parameters are fitted. A data first rule with more parameters will be less explainable, and
more vulnerable to over-fitting. But a complex data first rule can also exploit a novel
trading pattern that simpler rules will miss.

Can be systematised
Ideas need to translated into systematised rules. Not all styles of trading are entirely suitable
for this, because they are inherently subjective or because of data limitations. They can


28
                                                          Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


still however be wrapped up inside a systematic position management framework, as I
show in the semi-automatic trader example.

Too subjective
Many methods of trading cannot be systematised because it’s impossible to write down a
set of relatively simple, objective and generic rules. For more esoteric forms of technical
analysis turning a strangely named candlestick pattern into a precise rule is difficult.
Another example would be merger arbitrage where you have to assess the likelihood of a
deal going through based on analysis of a number of hard to quantify factors.

Data limitations
Even if a strategy is objective the necessary data might be unavailable. Even if you could
write trading rules for merger arbitrage the necessary information about legal and
regulatory issues cannot easily be converted into an algorithm friendly format.
There might also be a shortage of data. As you will see in the next chapter, ‘Fitting’, many
years of data are needed to properly test a strategy. Some hedge funds have recently used
data such as Google search popularity and Twitter trending to forecast markets. These
ideas make good press releases, but there won’t be enough data to properly evaluate them
for many years.
You might also struggle to compare data between instruments. For example accounting
measures aren’t consistent across countries because of different rules and standards. This
means inter country equity value strategies are difficult to implement.


When trading rules don’t work

Staunch systems trader
This section mostly relates to how trading rules are fitted. This is less applicable
to asset allocating investors and semi-automatic traders. They can skip to ‘Why
are certain rules profitable?’

There are various reasons why a rule that was successful in back-test might fail in reality.

It never really worked
First there are rules which apparently work in a back-test, but wouldn’t have actually
made money in the past. The rules might be over-fitted, which I will discuss at length in
the next chapter. Alternatively they could rely on forward looking data that was published
with a delay not present in the back-test. There may be also survivorship bias in the

                                                                                            29
Systematic Trading



instruments you are considering.You might have underestimated trading costs or missed
out an important element of the market structure at the time, such as constraints on
short selling of equities. Finally your history could be too brief and miss out on a crucial
period when the strategy would have blown up.23

The world changes
You want strategies that worked in the past and will continue to do so. But what if the
behaviour or market pattern you are trying to exploit vanishes?
For example what if systematic traders, using the same rules, dominate a market? Won’t
the relevant strategies all stop working? This is most problematic for relative value
strategies which try and buy when assets become cheap and sell when they are expensive.
With a large population of similar systems any slight mis-pricing will be immediately
corrected and returns will vanish.
Conversely trend followers might be happy to see price trends reinforced when they
collectively dominate a market, however when prices reverse they could get caught in a
synchronised rush for the exit.
When computers have a significant advantage, as in ultra high frequency trading, they
have squeezed out people almost entirely. These are no longer taking advantage of human
weaknesses or market structure, but are engaged in an arms race where success comes
from pure speed and anticipating your opponent’s reaction. This area falls entirely outside
the domain of this book.


Why certain rules are profitable

This section is relevant to all readers

Whether you are using systematic rules or making discretionary forecasts it’s important
to understand where your returns are coming from and what your ‘edge’ is – if any. This
section briefly covers the theory around this subject.24 It presents some possible reasons
why certain assets, portfolios of assets, or dynamic trading rules make profits.




23. This is the aptly named ‘Peso problem’ and is particularly problematic for negative skew strategies which
I define later in this chapter.
24. An exhaustive treatment of this topic can be found in Expected Returns by Antti Ilmanen.

30
                                                           Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


Risk premia
When you buy insurance you pay a premium. Premia are set at a level where insurers expect
to have occasional large payouts, but to be profitable on average. The insurance buyer is
guaranteed to lose over the long run, but in return is covered against rare significant
losses. These two different profiles of returns are also seen in the financial markets, so the
analogy of buying and selling insurance is very useful.
Anyone wanting to buy ‘financial insurance’ will happily suffer below average market
returns, whilst those willing to sell would get higher returns through earning a risk
premium, analogous to the insurer’s profits. Certain assets are more heavily exposed
to certain kinds of risks; buying these assets brings additional returns from various risk
premia.

Persistent risk premium
Some risk premia persist for long periods, like the extra return you’d expect from investing
in equities versus safer assets like bonds. A range of other risk factors such as book-to-
market ratios and firm size are used in equity value strategies. In other assets there are
different premia. For example longer maturity bonds earn a premium over those which
mature earlier since investors like to be compensated for lending over longer periods.

Timing varying risk premium
Buying cheap credit default swap insurance on risky mortgages in 2006 subsequently
made hedge fund manager John Paulson billions of dollars when the market melted down
a year later.25 Conversely when there is blood on the streets you can buy risky assets for
peanuts, as in early 2009 when I bought my insufficiently aggressive stake in Barclays.
Clearly risk premia are not constant. People’s appetite for risk varies over time as they
veer between the relative euphoria of years like 2006 and the panic of 2009. You can
make profits buying cheap premia and selling expensive ones. This is a form of mean
reversion trading, where you assume premia, and hence prices, will revert to some long-
term equilibrium.
In practice it’s impossible to say exactly what the ‘correct’ value of a premium should be
and infer if you should be buying or selling. The market can also move away from its
correct value for long periods of time. Nevertheless this is another useful source of return.

Skew and unlikely events premium
The rational investor of classical financial theory only cares about an asset’s Sharpe ratio
(SR) – it’s average returns adjusted for their standard deviation. This only makes sense if
all assets have symmetrically distributed returns. But in practice assets with the same SR

25. See The Greatest Trade Ever by Gregory Zuckerman.

                                                                                             31
Systematic Trading



could make steady losses with occasional large returns (like an insurance buyer), or steady
gains with occasional large losses (as a seller of insurance does). This implies that the skew
of each asset’s returns is different.



     CONCEPT: SHARPE RATIO (SR)
     The Sharpe ratio (SR) measures how profitable a trading strategy or holding an
     asset has been, or is expected to be. To calculate it you take returns and adjust them
     for their risk.
     Strictly speaking you should take the ‘excess’ return over and above a risk free
     interest rate,26 although this isn’t relevant for a trader using derivatives,27 nor as
     important in the post 2009 low interest rate era as it was before.
     Formally it is the mean return for a particular time period divided by the
     standard deviation of returns for the same time period. So the daily SR would
     be the average daily return, divided by the standard deviation of daily returns.
     However I normally use the annualised Sharpe ratio – annualised returns divided
     by annualised standard deviation. Assuming there are 256 business days in a year
     the annualised SR is roughly 16 times the daily.28
     The Sharpe ratio is not a perfect measure. In particular its assumption of symmetric
     gains and losses is unrealistic. It is useless for comparing assets where infrequent
     large losses occur with others that have rare large gains; for this you need to
     consider skew.




     CONCEPT: SKEW
     In chapter one when discussing standard deviation I said that a large loss was as
     likely as a large gain for the symmetric Gaussian normal distribution. A two
     sigma move up in price would occur around 2.5% of the time, with the same
     chance of a two sigma move down.
     But many assets don’t have a symmetric distribution – their returns are skewed to
     one side or the other. In many cases large losses are more likely than large gains.

26. The US Fed funds rate, UK Bank of England base rate, or whatever is relevant elsewhere.
27. For derivative traders the cost of funding is embedded in their returns. This ignores the interest received
on any margin posted or excess funds.
28. This is because you multiply the average daily return by the number of trading days in a year, or 256,
to annualise it, but you multiply the daily standard deviation of returns by the ‘square root of time’, and the
square root of 256 is 16. See page 21. Technical note: This is an approximation which is only exact for
returns with Gaussian normal distributions and no autocorrelation.

32
                                                      Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


Global stock markets fell 20% on a single day in October 1987 – about 20 sigma
– but they have never rallied as rapidly.
Where an asset has a higher chance of a large down move than an equivalent up
move, it is said to have a negative skew. If large up moves are more likely then it
has positive skew.
Assuming they have the same Sharpe ratio, the returns from a positively skewed
asset will contain more losing days than for those of a negatively skewed asset. But
the losing days will be relatively small in magnitude. A negatively skewed asset will
have fewer down days, but the losses on those days will be larger.
Returning to my earlier analogy, buying insurance is a positive skew strategy. You
will experience frequent small losses (paying out premia) with occasional large
gains (receiving payouts). If you sell insurance then you’ll get frequent small gains
and occasional large losses – negative skew.
Figure 5 and table 1 show the return distribution and statistics of two assets with
different skews but the same Sharpe ratio.

FIGURE 5: TWO ASSETS, SAME SHARPE RATIO, DIFFERENT SKEWS




Which is better, positive or negative skew? It depends...




                                                                                        33
Systematic Trading



     TABLE 1: CHARACTERISTICS OF NEGATIVE VERSUS POSITIVE SKEW


                                         Negative     Positive
                                          skew         skew

      Mean of daily returns                0.4%         0.4%

      Sigma of daily returns               6.3%         6.3%

      Annualised Sharpe ratio               1.0          1.0

      Skew of daily returns                 -1.0         1.0

      Median daily return                  1.4%         -0.6%

      Average Gain:Average Loss             0.8          1.4

      Hit rate (% of positive returns)     59%          46%

      Expected annual worst daily loss     -22%         -10%

      Expected annual best daily gain       10%         22%




     Equities normally have mildly negative skew. ‘Safe haven’ assets like gold and Swiss
     francs tend to have positive skew. However the skew of these assets is relatively
     mild compared to owning options.
     One group of option-like assets are the equity volatility indices: the VIX index
     on the US S&P 500, and the V2TX index on the European Euro Stoxx 50. Both
     of these can be traded with very liquid futures.
     Buying the VIX and V2TX futures gives you highly positive skew, but as you are
     effectively purchasing insurance against unexpectedly high equity volatility it also
     tends to have a negative Sharpe ratio (SR). Similarly selling the futures gives a
     positive SR, but with an extremely negative skew. Each of these futures has skew
     around four times higher than their underlying index.


Many people have a strong dislike for the occasional large losses of negative skew which
is why they buy home insurance. Relative value strategies tend to exhibit this behaviour,
so investors should demand a skew premium for investing in them.
Conversely positive skew is attractive, which partly explains why even highly numerate and
rational people like me buy lottery tickets. A related effect is that most of us overestimate
very rare probabilities. This means we will overpay for disaster insurance, such as deep out
of the money put options that will only pay off if stocks drop 20%.

34
                                                             Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


People also like to have a small chance of winning large amounts; they buy out of the
money call options, favour 200-1 horses whose real chance of winning is 1,000 to 1, and
once again they buy lottery tickets. They will happily give up return premia to those who
are willing to take the other side of these gambles.
These various illogical preferences can be explained by cognitive biases.

Leverage
Do you borrow to invest? Classical financial theory assumes people will borrow freely,
but many investors cannot or will not do so. Borrowing to buy stocks on margin is
still unusual behaviour for amateur traders. Although the availability of derivatives like
futures and contracts for difference has increased substantially they are still a tool for the
brave minority. Many institutional funds do not borrow either, whilst for others there are
limits imposed by regulators and brokers.
This means that high Sharpe ratio (SR) assets with low returns, but even lower volatility,
will remain unloved by those who require high returns and can’t borrow to invest. They
would rather buy high return assets with higher risk, even if the additional risk is not fully
compensated for and the SR is lower.
As a result undiversified portfolios are common, with equities contributing nearly all the
volatility. People prefer riskier stocks, epitomised by the technology bubble in 1999. This
effect also explains why short maturity bonds have historically had higher SR than longer
maturity bonds.The lucky investors who can use leverage should outperform others over
the long run. But beware: in a crisis a death spiral can easily develop in portfolios built on
debt. Prices fall, brokers ask for more margin or restrict borrowing entirely, investors have
to sell, and prices fall further. These forced sales at the worst possible price can eliminate
years of profits.
I’ll discuss the safe use of leverage in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’.

Liquidity and size
The degree of liquidity in an asset is how easily we can buy or sell without unduly affecting
the price. Larger institutional investors have to buy in large size and liquidate quickly on
client redemptions, so they prefer liquid assets, which then get their prices bid up relative
to less liquid alternatives. Thus we get the well known effect of smaller companies offering
better returns. Liquidity premia also explain the attractiveness of ‘alternative’ assets like
land and venture capital. Investors happy to hold less liquid portfolios for longer periods
have greater opportunities for higher returns.
The premia for liquidity, size and leverage can vary over time, presenting opportunities
for well timed buying and selling. For example derivatives related to mortgage backed
assets were liquid and attracted premium prices at the end of 2006; a year later they were


                                                                                               35
Systematic Trading



almost untradeable and willing buyers could get significant discounts even on heavily
depressed official quotes.

When others have to trade
Not everyone trades because they are trying to make money. Some are forced to. For
example central banks wishing to keep their currency weak – such as Switzerland or Japan
– can do so indefinitely if they are comfortable with the ensuing costs.29
A foreign exchange carry trading rule that borrows in low interest rate currencies like
Switzerland and invests in high interest rate currencies will be consistently profitable as a
result, at least until the currency policy is abandoned (as it was for Switzerland in January
2015). This can lead to sudden losses, making carry a decidedly negative skew strategy.
Here are some other examples from different asset classes. End of year trading to minimise
taxation or ‘window dress’ balance sheets creates seasonal effects in equity prices. Insurance
companies might have to buy rare long maturity bonds to hedge liabilities, pushing up
their price. As long as the position size of those forced to trade is greater than those who
exploit them these opportunities will persist.
Another set of money making opportunities is available to those willing to act as liquidity
providers. Note this is different from earning a liquidity premium by holding illiquid
assets for long periods. Liquidity providers behave as market markets, trying to capture
the spread that less patient traders don’t mind paying. This is definitely negative skew
territory as unforeseen price spikes can quickly wipe out large quantities of patiently
accumulated small gains.

Barriers to entry, returns to effort and cost
Some trading rules have barriers to entry in the form of costs or investments that need to
be made to realise profits from them. High frequency strategies require renting expensive
servers located physically within exchange buildings, as well as developing specialised
software. The returns of such systems need to be high enough to compensate for the
investment needed, as well as their much higher costs.
If an opportunity requires a lot of work to exploit, then it may be passed up by most
investors and additional returns would be available. An example would be investing in
private firms, where lengthy due diligence and legal work is required. It’s important to
understand that just because something takes time, and may require specialist knowledge,
doesn’t mean the profits are a payment for skill. The extra returns available are just fair
compensation for the time and effort needed.

29. Conversely, governments cannot maintain strong currencies indefinitely against market pressure as their
foreign reserves will eventually run out. This happened in 1992 when the UK government tried to support
the pound to keep its value within the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. Hedge fund manager George
Soros bet against the Bank of England and made a billion pounds or so when they capitulated.

36
                                                           Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


Behavioural effects
A classical financial economist would be comfortable with most of the above explanations.
But you can also create rules which extract returns from other people’s behavioural
weaknesses. These effects persist because of market inefficiencies such as bans on short
selling, and the sheer weight of money influenced by these biases.
The early loss taker trading rule of chapter one is a simple trend following rule which I
believe is profitable because of prospect theory biases. People don’t want to keep recent
winners, they prefer hanging on to losers, and they will give up excess returns for the nice
warm feeling they get from behaving like this. Prospect theory can also explain preferences
people have around return skew and overweighting unlikely events, which I’ve already
touched on. There are a large number of other behavioural biases, and strategies that
could be built on them.

Self-fulfilling prophecy
Many weird technical trading systems such as Fibonacci numbers and the like have
absolutely no justification, except perhaps some tenuous link to behavioural theories.
But because a lot of people use these ideas we do get persistent price movements around
key levels, and they may end up working. It is hard to say if they will continue to work
in the future.

Pure alpha and skill
Warren Buffett, John Templeton, Peter Lynch: there are a small number of investors
who seem to be able to persistently generate extraordinary profits that none of the above
theories can easily explain. It is possible they are just very lucky, the one in a billion
monkey who has by sheer fluke successfully written a sonnet. But they may possess the
rare elixir of alpha; genuine skill in making investment decisions.
It is unlikely that what these outliers do can be written down and reproduced systematically.
Those who exhibit pure skill can adapt to changing market opportunities in a way that a
systematic rule never could. If you think you are part of this elite group then the semi-
automatic trader example is for you.




                                                                                             37
Systematic Trading



Classifying trading styles

This section is relevant to all readers.
This section is useful for all three example groups. I believe even semi-automatic
traders would benefit from having a good understanding of the likely risks of
their style of trading.


Static versus dynamic
A trading strategy could be static – where you invest your portfolio and then do nothing.
The returns from static strategies inherit the characteristics of the underlying assets.
Alternatively it could be dynamic – where you actively trade. In this case you will earn
additional types of return from buying and selling, and the characteristics of those returns
will depend on your trading style.
There are various degrees of static strategies. The most vanilla flavour is a simple buy and
hold portfolio. Let’s pretend that Apple and Microsoft have the same price per share. If
you can’t decide between them then you’d buy equal numbers of shares in Apple and
Microsoft today.
Next week Apple brings out a new iGadget and doubles in price, whilst sclerotic Microsoft
halves after releasing a new Windows that everyone hates. As a buy and hold investor you
would do nothing. Your portfolio is now seriously unbalanced; 80% in Apple and only
20% in Microsoft.
The second degree static strategy is to re-balance your portfolio so you keep the same cash
value in each company. You’d need to sell your Apple shares to the point where you only
had 50% of your portfolio in the designer of swanky white gadgets, whilst simultaneously
buying shares in the semi-monopolistic software house.
Now suppose you wanted not just an equal cash value for the two companies but equal
risk. This is often called risk parity investing. We’ll assume risk is equal to the recent
standard deviation of the daily percentage changes in price for each firm.




38
                                                                      Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


    CONCEPT: RISK
    Risk is a slippery concept which is difficult to pin down. I like to divide the world
    of risk into predictable risks, or what Donald Rumsfeld30 would call Known
    Unknowns, and unpredictable risks (Unknown Unknowns).
    It’s very hard to forecast what the return will be each day over the next few weeks for
    an asset or portfolio. But you can model and estimate what the variation in returns
    is likely to be. Estimates based entirely on assuming that recent levels of variation
    will persist tend to be relatively good.31 The element of risk that is encapsulated by
    a model of variation is the predictable part.
    However there is always the danger that you haven’t correctly estimated the
    underlying variation, or that the level of variation will change, or that your model
    of where market returns come from is wrong or incomplete (perhaps because of
    skew and other nuances since returns aren’t usually exactly Gaussian normal).32
    These are all sources of unpredictable risks.
    I define predictable risk as being equal to the recent historic level of the standard
    deviation of percentage daily changes in price. This is a useful simplification
    but one which ignores the unpredictable elements of risk. The dangers of this
    assumption should always be at the front of your mind.


Again suppose for simplicity each technology stock starts life with the same standard
deviation of returns, so for a third degree portfolio you would put 50% of your cash in
each stock.
Now Apple has to recall its latest iPhone due to a technical fault, so the price crashes.
The next day it rebounds to its prior level on news that Apple is to buy coolstartup.com.
Although the price is unchanged the expected risk of thrilling Apple shares (defined as
the recent standard deviation of returns) has doubled relative to dull Microsoft. If you did
nothing, two-thirds of your estimated portfolio risk would be coming from AAPL, and
just one-third from MSFT.
In a fourth degree static portfolio you rebalance to get a constant expected risk allocation.
Once again you’d need to sell Apple and buy Microsoft to bring things back into line.
My example asset allocating investor will be running a fourth degree static portfolio.
Although they will not use any dynamic trading rules, they will use the systematic
framework to ensure that their portfolio risk remains as desired.


30. In a speech in 2002 US Secretary of State Donald Rumsfeld identified three kinds of knowledge: known
knowns, known unknowns and unknown unknowns.
31. I’ll discuss exactly how you measure recent levels of standard deviation in chapter ten, ‘Position sizing’.
If you can’t wait, it’s on page 155.
32. This essentially is the problem that Nassim Taleb discusses in his book The Black Swan.

                                                                                                            39
Systematic Trading



     CONCEPT: VOLATILITY STANDARDISATION
     One of the most powerful techniques I use in my trading system framework is
     volatility standardisation. This is adjusting the returns of different assets so that
     they have the same expected risk. As I discussed above, my standard definition of
     expected risk is to use an estimate of recent standard deviation.
     This has a number of benefits. It allows you to have dynamic portfolios where each
     component contributes an equal amount of risk. Furthermore, as you’ll see later
     in the book it means that you can apply the same trading rule to different assets, if
     the trading rule is applied to volatility standardised returns.
     It also means that you can easily combine different trading rules, and run portfolios
     of rules for multiple instruments.



Skew again
The most overlooked characteristic of a strategy is the expected skew of its returns, i.e.
how symmetrical they are.
As you shall see in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’, the different characteristics of
positive and negative skew trading determine how much risk you should take. If you
are using a systematic trading rule and have access to back-testing technology you can
measure your skew. Otherwise you will need to make a judgment on what it is likely to
be based on your trading style.
Be aware that if you are making steady profits nearly every day, and most of your trades
are winners, then there is a good chance you are engaged in negative skew trading. It’s just
that you haven’t yet seen any rare large losses.


 Positive skew                                   Negative skew

 Frequent small losses and infrequent large      Frequent small gains and infrequent large
 gains.                                          losses.

 Like buying an insurance policy.                Like selling an insurance policy.

 Similar to buying options, you benefit from     Similar to selling options, you benefit from
 prices moving more than expected.               prices moving less than expected.

 Because losses tend to be small and frequent,   Because losses are large and infrequent, risk
 risk management is easier.                      management is harder.

 Leverage required depends on asset class,       Often requires leverage to achieve decent
 but is lower than for negative skew.            absolute returns in normal times; so gets
                                                 killed in bad times.

40
                                                                    Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules



 Positive skew                                         Negative skew

 Examples:                                             Examples:
 • Trend following strategies.                         • FX carry
 • Bets done by buying options, e.g. if you            • Fixed income relative value as practised by
 think the stock market will weaken then               Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), a
 buying put options.                                   large hedge fund that blew up in 1998.**
 • John Paulson in 2006 buying cheap credit            • Market making.
 default swap insurance on securities backed
                                                       • Short option strategies, e.g. selling equity
 by mortgages.*
                                                       option ‘straddles’ (pairs of call and put
 • Tail protect hedge funds that try and               options). Such as Nick Leeson of Barings
 provide cheap insurance against large                 who lost around $1 billion selling straddles in
 market moves, as practised by Nassim Taleb            January 1995.***
 amongst others.



* See The Greatest Trade Ever by Gregory Zuckerman.
** See When Genius Failed by Roger Lowenstein.
*** See Rogue Trader by none other than Nick Leeson.




Trading speed: Fast vs Slow

Very slow (average holding period: several months to many years)
Very slow systems look almost like static portfolios, with additional gradual changes in
position coming from their trading rules. Rules often involve mean reversion to very
long run equilibrium such as relative value equity portfolios that buy past losers, and sell
recent winners.
Returns from dynamic trading get worse the less frequently you trade because of the law
of active management; at these slow speeds they will be very poor. These lower profits
can’t be statistically distinguished from noise, so you should avoid using these kinds of
rules in systematic strategies.




                                                                                                      41
Systematic Trading



     CONCEPT: LAW OF ACTIVE MANAGEMENT
     The law of active management, first articulated by Richard Kahn in 1989, states
     that the Sharpe ratio33 of a trading strategy will be proportional to the square root
     of the number of independent bets made per year.
     This law gives us some idea of how profits should vary with trading speed. Suppose
     you’re holding one asset at a time, and making one ‘bet’ per year (buying, holding
     for 12 months before selling, then repeating), and that you expect an SR of 0.15
     from this activity.
     Now if you decide to make four ‘bets’ a year, holding the asset for three months,
     then because 2 is the square root of 4 you should expect an SR of 2 × 0.15 = 0.30.
     If you begin betting every single business day, then with around 256 business days
     in a year the SR will be 16 times larger than 0.15, or 2.4. This is a very decent
     Sharpe ratio indeed.
     Unfortunately this result is theoretical and has its flaws. Firstly it assumes that
     the ‘skill’ of the trader is constant across holding periods. However the skills
     required to day trade are very different from those a long-term investor needs, as
     I’m sure Warren Buffett would agree. This is particularly true for systematic trading
     rules which tend to have a ‘sweet spot’ holding period. For example at medium
     frequencies of weeks to months most assets exhibit momentum; but at shorter and
     longer horizons they behave differently.
     More importantly the law ignores transaction costs. As you’ll see later in the book
     these can seriously damage the returns of fast traders, except perhaps in very cheap
     markets.
     Nevertheless this result seems to hold reasonably well for longer periods where
     costs are not an issue. Most trading rules see their Sharpe ratios declining once
     they have holding periods exceeding several months. If due to high costs you need
     to trade this slowly you are probably better trying not to forecast asset prices at all,
     like an asset allocating investor.
     The other important implication of the law is that diversification across assets
     can substantially improve returns. If you can find four assets which have zero
     correlation then you can double your Sharpe ratio. Whilst this might seem
     unrealistic a trading strategy with a large number of instruments, covering a group
     of half a dozen asset classes, the returns of which will be relatively uncorrelated,
     can have returns which are two to three times those for a single asset.



33. Actually it’s the information ratio, which is identical to the Sharpe ratio except that the numerator is the
return relative to a benchmark rather than the risk free rate. For our purpose however the distinction isn’t
important.

42
                                                            Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


Medium (average holding period: a few hours or days, to several months)
Again because of the law of active management you get more attractive returns as you
reduce your holding period to a few months or less. Profits from trading rules become
statistically significant and they can be back-tested.
Although trading rules can’t attain the large Sharpe ratios of high frequency trading they
are readily accessible to a wider population of traders. A manual system, run part-time,
working on daily data and trading through an ordinary broker works well enough. As a
result more people’s effort and research goes into investigating this particular realm, so it’s
perhaps less likely that there are any highly profitable and novel trading rules that have
not yet been discovered.
Trading costs need to be accurately measured to decide whether an instrument should be
traded at a faster or slower speed within this region. Large institutional traders also need
to determine if a market has the capacity to absorb their trading. I cover these subjects in
chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.

Fast (holding period: microseconds to one day)
The final part of the spectrum goes from day trading down to millisecond level high
frequency trading and market making. Typical raw Sharpe ratios could be very high due
to the number of trades made, but costs will chew up a big chunk of profits. Special
execution algorithms are needed to reduce costs below normal levels. Back-testing
requires sophisticated models of the evolution of the order book.
There are higher barriers to entry than at slower speeds; co-located servers and fully
automated software is needed. Also faster strategies are likely to have limited capacity.
Capital requirements are small as positions are not held overnight, but there is always the
danger of extreme losses due to markets gapping, or systems going rogue. It is impossible
for humans to monitor trading activity in real time so you need very tight controls and
good monitoring systems.
All this means that realising the very high theoretical Sharpe ratio from super fast strategies
is no picnic. The domain of high frequency trading mostly falls outside the scope of this
book.

Technical vs fundamental
Strategies vary in the source of data they use, either using technical or fundamental
information, or both. Purely technical rules only use price data. Non price, fundamental
data, comes in two main flavours: micro and macro. Micro data is about a specific asset,
for example the yield of a particular bond or the PE ratio of a company. Macro data such
as inflation and GDP growth covers entire economies.



                                                                                              43
Systematic Trading



I have worked extensively with both fundamental and technical data. Technical systems
are easier to build and run, but in another example of barriers to entry the additional
effort required for including fundamental rules is usually rewarded with higher returns.
The examples in this book are all technical, but only because they are simpler to explain.

Portfolio size
There are successful traders who only ever trade one futures contract. At the other
extreme large equity index funds could have thousands of holdings. Remember that the
law of active management shows that diversification is the best source of additional
risk adjusted returns. Both traders and investors should hold more positions when they
can; ideally across several asset classes to get the greatest possible benefit. With larger
portfolios you’re also less exposed to instrument specific problems such as bad data or
temporary liquidity issues.
However smaller portfolios make sense for semi-automatic traders or for those running
entirely manual systems. As I’ll discuss in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, those with
relatively small accounts also have to limit the number of positions they take.
To make them tractable the examples in this book have relatively small numbers of
instruments. But I trade over 40 futures contracts across multiple asset classes in my own
fully automated system since I firmly believe in diversification.

Leverage: more risk and yet more skew
Leverage is borrowing to invest or trade. The borrowing can be explicit as when trading
equities on margin, or implicit as with derivatives like futures. You need leverage when
the natural return and risk of an asset is less than desired. If you want a 10% return on
average, and your asset is a bond with an expected Sharpe ratio of 0.5, but only a 5%
annualised standard deviation, then you need to lever up four times.34
Is leverage dangerous? Not always. Leverage alone is a poor measure of risk, as varying
amounts make sense for different assets. What makes it deadly is the potential for large
unexpected losses.
Suppose you’d put on a relative value trade in 2007 between two highly correlated bonds,
buying four year and selling five year bonds, both issued by the Greek government.35 This
would have earned you a fairly steady return of much less than 1% a year but with almost
zero volatility. Because of the low natural risk you would probably have used leverage to
increase your chances of getting a reasonable return like 5% or 10% a year.


34. With no leverage your expected return will be the Sharpe ratio of 0.5 multiplied by the standard deviation
of 5%, e.g. 2.5%. To get a return of 10% you need to leverage your portfolio four times since 2.5% × 4 =
10%.
35. For finance geeks reading this it’s implicit here that I am doing this trade on a duration neutral basis.

44
                                                           Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


In early 2010 the close relationship between these two bonds collapsed due to the huge
uncertainty about the likelihood and timing of a European bailout of Greece. You would
have seen significantly higher losses on your four year bond than profits on the five year,
and a huge loss overall.
To rub salt into the wound even though you could cover the initial losses your brokers
then demanded yet more margin. You ended up forced to sell out at the worst possible
price. Because you used leverage to do the trade you would have had no choice but
to liquidate the position, even though it would be profitable when the bonds finally
matured.
Notice that this relative value trade is a classic example of negative skew, small consistent
gains until the trade goes terribly wrong. These steady gains tricked you into thinking that
the position was low risk, and lured you into using leverage to improve your returns. But
you have the unpredictable risk that the volatility or correlations will change, and for
negative skew positions it will usually surprise with large losses rather than gains.
So beware of gearing up on apparently low risk with an asset or with a style of trading
which is likely to have negative skew, even if you haven’t yet seen any evidence of the large
downside. As we’ll see later in the book I’m firmly against trading instruments with very
low volatility, and leveraging up negative skew trading rules too highly.

Contrarians, market followers and crowded trades
Mean reversion and relative value traders act as contrarians – they seek to take advantage
of mis-pricing which means buying low after falls and selling when the price has risen.
Other styles of trading involve following the market; notably the various forms of trend
following. Contrarian traders like to catch falling knives and buy more as prices fall.
Trend followers will close positions that have started to lose money, like the early loss
taker trading rule. Market followers tend to see positive skew from taking small losses as
the trend moves against them, with an occasional large profit from a significant move in
their favour. Conversely contrarians see negative skew, with many small profits as each
mis-pricing is corrected, then occasional large losses when prices jump away from their
equilibrium.
Crowded trades are deadly. They happen when the majority of market participants have
the same bet on, which could be from behaving as contrarians or market followers. As the
story goes when the shoeshine boy or the taxi driver is in the market, it’s time to get out.
Crowded trades are most lethal when a leveraged strategy has started to go wrong and
positions have to be liquidated to meet margin requirements.
Relative value strategies which need high leverage are particularly vulnerable to crowds.
Often after a long stable period of rising markets these trades get swamped by people
seeking extra returns. This results in the available profits being reduced, the apparent risk
falling, and required leverage increasing further. Then the music stops and their negative
skew becomes horribly apparent.

                                                                                             45
Systematic Trading



Two classic examples are the meltdown of fixed income relative value hedge fund manager
Long Term Capital Management in mid-199836 and the Quant Quake – sharp losses seen
over just two days by equity relative value systematic funds in August 2007.


Achievable Sharpe ratios

This section is relevant to all readers

It’s important to have a realistic sense of what level of Sharpe ratios (SR) are achievable.
As I said in the previous chapter, inflated expectations can lead to over betting (which we’ll
discuss more in chapter nine, ‘Volatility Targeting’) and overtrading (see chapter twelve,
‘Speed and Size’), both of which will seriously damage your chances of trading profitably.
Let’s begin with one of the simplest possible risky investments, a long only equity position
in one company. Although they have been higher in the past, excess equity returns on
single equities will probably average around 3% a year in the future. This is because the
main cause of higher returns was the significant fall in inflation from the mid 1970’s;
something that won’t be repeated. With annualised standard deviation of around 20%
this implies an SR of 3% ÷ 20% = 0.15 is realistic.
Using the results implied by the law of active management, investing in a portfolio of
equities will do slightly better. A group of at least 20 equities trading in the same country
but diversified across different industries should have an SR of around 0.20. This is also
what I’d expect from holding an equity index, like the S&P 500. If you invest globally
across multiple countries you can probably get to a Sharpe ratio of around 0.25.
To do much better you’d need to allocate across multiple asset classes: equities, bonds,
commodities and so on. Because correlations between asset classes are usually low a
portfolio covering several of these types of assets can probably expect to reach a Sharpe
ratio of around 0.40. Notice this is slightly more than double what you get from investing
in an equity index. This is a realistic maximum figure for static strategies, like those used
by asset allocating investors.
It’s much harder to say what the returns should be for dynamic trading rules, like those
used by staunch systems traders. My own experience is that with a reasonably diversified
set of rules the average SR on a single instrument, such as a commodity future or FX
spread bet, is around 0.40.37 Again if you trade across multiple asset classes then you can
get around double this.

36. See When Genius Failed by Roger Lowenstein.
37. This result comes from using trading rules with holding periods of a few days up to several months.
My own highly diversified futures trading system has a back-tested SR of 1.0, and in part four I create a
simplified version of this with an SR of just over 0.50. Both back tests are done following the advice in part
two, so the SR are realistic and not over-fitted.

46
                                                                       Chapter Two. Systematic Trading Rules


But many traders have highly unrealistic expectations of back-tested Sharpe ratios of
2.0, 3.0 or even higher; just on single instruments! These values are far too optimistic and
are caused by over-fitting, which I’ll discuss more in part two. In reality SR consistently
greater than 1.0 are rarely achieved, even by sophisticated institutional investors. Analysis
of returns from a group of systematic hedge funds shows that none could sustain a Sharpe
ratio above 1.0 for more than a few years.38
What sort of SR should discretionary semi-automatic traders expect? This is a more
difficult question to answer. It is generally accepted that only a minority of traders are
profitable. Most likely to be losers are day traders and those in relatively expensive markets
such as retail FX spread betting.
I’m inclined to be optimistic and assume that a competent trader following the advice
in this book would get an average SR betting on a single instrument at a time of around
0.25. This is obviously lower than the trader using a systematic trading rule. Such traders
tend not to diversify across asset classes. However if they did this would imply a total
portfolio SR of no more than 0.50.
There is a good chance the Sharpe ratios I’ve given here probably won’t meet your needs or
expectations. There are two apparently easy ways to try and increase them, both of which
are incredibly dangerous.
Firstly you could trade negative skew strategies. Very high SR is often a result of hidden
negative skew. Take an imaginary strategy which returns 100% in year one, 65% in
year two, 100% in year three, 65% in year four and so on. After 20 years the SR is an
astonishing 4.6. Unfortunately in year 21 you make minus 100% and lose your entire
investment. It turns out this system had seriously negative skew.
Although this might seem like a bad result the Sharpe ratio after 21 years is still an
excellent 1.7, even once the skew has revealed itself. Clearly this is not a genuine example,
but less extreme instances of this have actually occurred. For example the SR of Long Term
Capital Management, the hedge fund which blew up in 1998 and which I mentioned
earlier in the chapter, was also around 4.6.
The second path to the mirage of higher Sharpe is to trade more quickly. The law of active
management implies that if you can realise a Sharpe ratio of 0.40 on a single instrument
when trading with a holding period of a month, then betting once a day could boost
that to an SR of 1.8. If you held your positions for just an hour and bet eight times a day
you’d get to an SR of 5.2! As I said earlier, this assumes that profitable opportunities can
be found at such timescales, and also ignores trading costs.


38. The analysis was done on a large set of Commodity Trading Advisors, a type of fund that is dominated
by systematic trend followers. These returns are post fees (so the gross returns would be higher), but also
include interest received on margin funds. These two effects roughly balance out. A small number of other
types of systematic hedge fund are able to consistently return Sharpe ratios above 1.0. However, as I’ll discuss
below, this is often due to negative skew.

                                                                                                             47
Systematic Trading



Table 2 assumes that you can achieve these theoretical pre-cost SR, but then takes costs into
account.39 It looks like trading every day, or every couple of days, could theoretically give
you an SR above 1.0 on a single asset. However this is only true if you use futures, which
are very cheap to trade. Most amateur investors use more expensive derivatives; for example
spread bets in the UK. It’s impossible, even in theory, to trade these quickly and profitably.


TABLE 2: CAN YOU REALLY MAKE MORE MONEY TRADING FASTER? IN THEORY IF YOU TRADE
FUTURES, WHICH ARE CHEAP. WITH EXPENSIVE ASSETS LIKE SPREAD BETTING, NO CHANCE

  Holding period        Theoretical SR         After cost SR,           After cost SR,
                          pre-cost             average future         average spread bet

  1 month                     0.40                   0.37                      0.28

  1 week                      0.83                   0.71                      0.27

  1 day                        1.8                    1.2                      -0.75

  Half a day                   2.6                    1.4                      -2.5

  One hour                     5.2                   0.28                      -16.4



The table shows the theoretical Sharpe ratio (SR) for a given holding period (rows),
assuming the one month SR is 0.40. SR are also shown after costs have been deducted,
for a typical futures contract and spread bet respectively.



Conclusion
You may assume that I have a strong dislike for certain investing styles and instruments,
in particular those with negative skew. Nothing could be further from the truth and
about a third of my own trading system is in this category.
Instead I think that a balanced combination of trading rules, with different styles that
work in different environments, is better than any single alternative. It’s important that
you understand and can cope with the risks of your trading system. You, and your client
if you’re a professional money manager, must be comfortable with the likely behaviour
of your strategy.
I also believe finding the best trading rules is less important than designing your trading
system in the correct way. In particular you need to avoid the serious crime of over-
fitting. This will be the subject of the next chapter as we move on to part two – the tools
of systematic trading.

39. In chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, I’ll calculate how much it costs to trade different instruments. Those
costs are used here.
48
 PART TWO.


Toolbox
Chapter Three. Fitting

Staunch Systems Trader
This entire chapter is about using data to create the trading rules used by
staunch systematic traders. It is not necessary reading if you are going to use
my framework to make discretionary forecasts as a semi-automatic trader or
without any rules at all as an asset allocating investor.


A    DECISION TO RUN A SYSTEMATIC TRADING SYSTEM MEANS YOU
     have to select one or more trading rules and discard others as being unworthy.
This process is often called fitting. Given our human tendency to be overconfident this
procedure is fraught with danger. You need to beware of over-fitting:40 selecting a set
of trading rules that fit past data too well and which are unlikely to make money in the
future.


Chapter overview

 The perils of over-fitting          The dangers of trying to selectively choose and fit rules
                                     based on past data.

 Effective fitting                   Steps you must follow if you insist on fitting your trading
                                     rules.

 How I choose my rules               The process I use to avoid fitting almost entirely.




40. Another common term for this is curve fitting.

                                                                                               51
Systematic Trading



The perils of over-fitting

The 50 model kid
Shortly after leaving the hedge fund industry, I began discussions about consulting, and
managing some capital, for Aqueduct Capital,41 a local proprietary trading firm. The
office contained the usual mixture of grizzled ex-LIFFE traders and naïve youths, all
day trading a handful of futures contracts. But the boss was particularly proud of his
quantitative team which consisted of a couple of 20-somethings toting PCs running an
off-the-shelf back-testing software package.
“This is Joe. He’s only been here a month and he’s already come up with 50 new trading
rules that are profitable in back-tests!” exclaimed the boss.
“Yes, this software is amazing. It can automatically test hundreds of rules a day,” added Joe.
I managed to keep a straight face and replied as diplomatically as I could, “Well I am sure
some of them will work.”
Inevitably the joint venture discussions then broke down, which was fortunate as the
firm was liquidated a few months later. The discovery of apparently profitable rules sifted
from thousands of possibilities is an incredibly dangerous approach, for reasons that will
become apparent in the rest of the chapter.

Ideas first testing for rules and variations
Before understanding why Joe was on the wrong path you need to be clear on what fitting
actually involves. I’m going to restrict my attention in this chapter to the ideas first
method that I introduced in chapter two. You already know that I prefer the ideas first
approach, but the reason I use it here is because it’s much easier to explain and understand
how to avoid over-fitting, than with the alternative of data first.
The fitting process is going to involve selecting one or more trading rules from a list of
candidates, each based on a brilliant idea. Let’s look at a contrived example, but beware
this is not a rule I would recommend using. The basic hypothesis is that the British
pound/US dollar currency rate seems to move in ranges as figure 6 shows. You might
think that buying pounds if they’re 5% below their average over the last year, and selling
at 5% above, is a good strategy. This is an example of a mean reversion rule.
You would now test this initial rule on historical data and look at how it performs and
behaves. At this stage if the rule is unpromising you can drop it and move on to the next
idea. If you like it enough you can proceed to the next stage which I call calibration,
although it’s possible and often desirable to just stick with the initial version.



41. All names have been changed to protect the ignorant.

52
                                                                                         Chapter Three. Fitting


FIGURE 6: GBP VS USD EXCHANGE RATE




During calibration you examine some variations on the basic trading rule. In the simple
example you could test the original range of plus or minus 5% against alternatives such as
3%, 6% or 10%; or you can compare the current price against the average price over the
last year, or week, or two years and so on. Usually you would choose the most profitable
rule using a performance measure like the Sharpe ratio. Calibration can also be used – as
I will show later in the book – to find rules which behave in a given way, such as trading
at a given speed. You can then decide which variation, or variations, to keep.
Once you have chosen a portfolio of trading rules and variations you need to decide
how to allocate your capital amongst them. Portfolio allocation decisions like this are the
subject of the next chapter. For the moment it’s worth noting that a poor variation can be
rejected out of hand, or given a relatively small allocation in the overall system.
What if you want to use data first methods? Then you will need to be sufficiently expert
to apply the principles in this chapter with your own preferred tools.42 You should not use
a data first method for which you don’t have any deep understanding. I strongly suggest
that you do not use a method blindly, just because it came packaged with some back-
testing software.


42. The main danger of the data first process is that you allow too many degrees of freedom. (I will not be
defining this term since anyone using a data first approach ought to understand it already. If you don’t you’re
in trouble!) Whereas the danger of ideas first is that you test too many ideas, or variations of ideas, until you
find one (or 50!) that work. Either approach can result in over-fitted trading rules which look great in back-
test but underperform once actually trading.

                                                                                                              53
Systematic Trading



Before we continue here’s a final note of caution about ideas first testing. Any worthy
trading systems designer will know their history, have read all the right textbooks and be
aware of what other people trade. You could end up testing only ideas that you already
know will work, which is a form of implicit over-fitting. As a result no matter how
careful you are with the subsequent fitting process your back-tested Sharpe ratios will
probably still be overstated – beware overconfidence!

Cheating with a time machine
Let’s consider the first common mistake when fitting, which is pretending that you had
access to a time machine.
When fitting there are always two distinct time periods. First there is the period used to
fit the model, and secondly the time period used to test it. To illustrate this consider again
the example of trying to fit a GBPUSD trading rule, and assume you’re trying to find the
best single variation. Suppose you’ve got ten years of daily price data available to fit on.43
The easiest and probably most common method is to use the whole ten years as your
fitting period, and find the single most profitable variation over that decade. You then go
back and test how this single variation did over each of the same ten years. For each year
that you are testing in, you use the same model, based on the entire ten years of data.
Figure 7 shows this for an example model running between 1990 and 2000. Each stage of
the fitting occupies a row. So the first row shows that you would use all the data from the
years 1990-2000 to fit the model which you test in 1990. In stage two you use the same
fitted model to test performance in 1991, and so on.
The performance of this back-test will be amazing; too good to be true. Since no time
machine was really available you didn’t actually have the whole ten years of data in 1990
and you wouldn’t necessarily have chosen the right variation. This is known as an in
sample back-test because you are using the same data to fit and test performance. In
sample testing should be avoided as it will produce extremely optimistic back-test results,
and favour more complex rules that fit the data better but won’t do as well in real trading.
There are better alternatives. A common one is to split the sample into two historical
periods as in figure 8. You take all the data from the first half, 1990 to 1994, and fit the
best variation over that period. Then you use that single variation to test your performance
on the second out of sample period, which in this case is each year from 1995 to 2000.




43. Throughout this book I’m going to assume that you are using daily data. This often means you can get
longer histories of prices and it is appropriate for the kinds of trading rules I’ll be discussing. Having data at
a higher frequency is only necessary if you’re testing very fast trading rules, such as those that expect to hold
positions for less than a week.

54
                                                                                         Chapter Three. Fitting


The problem with this is that you waste half your data, and end up with only six years
of performance to look at.44 You also don’t account for any potential changes in market
structure in the second half of the data.


FIGURE 7: IN SAMPLE BACK-TESTING: EFFICIENT BUT DISHONEST




In sample testing. You use all the data to fit and then test performance from the start. In
each stage (row) you test data for a different year, but use data from all years to fit.




44. You can also fit on the first half of the data and test on the second half as before, and subsequently fit on
the second half and test on the first. This keeps more data but isn’t entirely honest as it still requires a time
machine, albeit one you use only once. Yet another variation is to use the entire dataset to fit except for the
year you are testing. This also strikes me as relatively dishonest.

                                                                                                              55
Systematic Trading



FIGURE 8: HALF OUT OF SAMPLE TESTING: HONEST, BUT WASTEFUL




You fit your trading rules on the first half, and then test performance on the second half. In
each stage (row) you test a different year, but always using the first half of the data to fit. No
testing is done in the first half of the data. The second half of the data isn’t used for fitting.
My preferred solution is to use an expanding window, as in figure 9.45 Suppose you think
you need at least a year to fit your system. In the next stage you fit on the first year of data
for 1990, and then test the resulting variation in the second year, 1991. Then in stage
three of figure 9 you test in 1992 using the variation fitted with data from the years 1990
and 1991. To test 1993 you use the best variation fitted using 1990, 1991 and 1992.
This continues until 2000 when you’re using the previous ten years of data to select the
best variation. Because you only fit using the past you’re not cheating. You also use as
much of the past as you ‘legally’ can, so nothing is wasted.
The only problem with this method is that if the world changes you’ll still be using
potentially irrelevant past data. To avoid this you could fit on the last five or ten years of
data, once you have enough history to do so, and discard earlier years. This is a rolling
window.46 As figure 10 shows a five-year rolling window is identical to the expanding
window until 1996. At this point you would discard 1990, and use only the years 1991
to 1995 to fit the best variation.
The length of the window needs to be short enough to pick up changes in market
structure, but long enough to give statistically significant results. As you’ll see later you
often require multiple decades of data to fit models, which makes the use of rolling
windows problematic.




45. This is sometimes called anchored fitting.
46. Another widely used term for this is walk forward fitting.
56
                                                                        Chapter Three. Fitting


FIGURE 9: EXPANDING OUT OF SAMPLE IS BOTH EFFICIENT AND HONEST




Every year you fit the data only on the past. Each row shows the fitting and testing done
for a particular year.


FIGURE 10: ROLLING OUT OF SAMPLE ADAPTS TO CHANGING CONDITIONS, BUT MAKE SURE
YOU HAVE ENOUGH DATA FOR STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE




Every year you use the past data to fit; up to five years’ worth. Each row shows the fitting
and testing done for a particular year.




                                                                                           57
Systematic Trading



When fitting goes bad
Now let’s examine a concrete example of poor fitting practice. I’m going to select the best
variation of the early loss taker trading rule I introduced in chapter one to run over the
CME gold futures contract, out of a possible menu of 90 variations.47 This might seem
excessive, but it’s fewer variations than Joe was testing in my earlier anecdote. Bear in
mind that if I had a five parameter trading rule, and I allowed each parameter to take one
of ten discrete values, then I’d be testing 10,000 variations!
Once I have at least one year of data I find the highest performing variation based on
the Sharpe ratio (SR) from the previous 12 months. I then test the performance for
the following year, again using the last 12 months of data. This process is then repeated
annually. You should recognise this as a one year rolling window back-test.
Which of the following alternatives do you think will give me the best performance?
1. Picking the best variation: Each year I use the best performing variation from the
   previous year.
2. Picking a random variation: Ignoring my fitting, each year I choose one variation at
   random. Because the randomness of each choice will influence the results I run this
   experiment a number of times, and take the average performance.
3. Keeping all the variations: Again ignoring my fitting, I keep all 90 variations, and use
   an equally weighted average of their forecasts.
If you’re a big fan of fitting the results are disappointing. Choosing the best rule each year
from the previous year gives me a rather poor SR of 0.07. If I go for the second option
and just choose a random rule annually each January 1st, then on average I get a Sharpe
of 0.2. The best option is to forget about selecting trading rule variations entirely and run
an equal blend of them all. This gives an SR of 0.33, which is pretty good for one kind of
trading rule run on a single instrument. These results could be a fluke but I get similar
results on many different instruments and trading rules.
Why does fitting do so badly?
Firstly choosing just one variation to run at a time smacks of overconfidence. As you’ll
see shortly we rarely have enough evidence that one rule is definitely better than another.
Secondly one year of data is wholly insufficient to decide which trading rule is best. I
make this problem worse by fitting on the history of a single instrument, gold futures.
Finally, like Joe, I am testing far too many variations.




47. For those who are interested this is based on the ‘A and B’ system defined in appendix B. Values for B (the
stop loss value) will be the integers from 1 to 10; to capture different trend lengths. Because I only want to
look at trend following rules (early loss takers) I iterate only over values of A (the profit target) that are equal
to or larger than B: A = 1 × B, 1.5 × B, 2 × B, ... 5 × B. This gives 90 possible variations in all.

58
                                                                                       Chapter Three. Fitting


The hazards of rule selection

The multiple testing problem – even some random rules will look good
Why is it so dangerous to test large numbers of trading rules and variations? Apart from
the effort involved it’s very likely that you will end up picking a poor rule just by chance.
To see why here is an experiment. Let’s suppose I am trying to achieve alchemy and find
profitable rules where there are none to be had. I have a pool of a certain number of
possible trading rules, all of which have true expected average returns of zero, although in
a real scenario I wouldn’t know this beforehand! The rules are entirely arbitrary and their
returns are generated from random data.48
For each test I get one year of return data for each rule in my pool, as in the gold futures
example above, and select all the rules whose Sharpe ratio (SR) in that year is higher than
a given minimum level. If no rule has an SR above the threshold then I won’t choose any.
All the rules that pass the test will be kept (even if there are 50!).
Because the underlying data is random I need to generate new data multiple times and
then repeat the test to get meaningful results. I then measure the average number of rules
accepted given a specific minimum level and the size of the pool available. As table 3
shows, even if I’m strict and set an extremely high minimum SR of 2.0 I’ll still pick up a
couple of bad rules if I test enough of them.


TABLE 3: IF YOU TEST ENOUGH RULES, SOME BAD ONES WILL ALWAYS SLIP THROUGH

                                   Minimum Sharpe ratio
  Number of rules
   tested in pool           0.5            1.0           2.0
           1                 <1             <1            <1
           5                 1.4            <1            <1
          10                 3             1.5            <1
          50                 16             8             1.2
         100                30              16           2.3


The table shows the average number of rules accepted from pools of arbitrary unprofitable
rules, given different pool sizes (rows), which were tested to see if their Sharpe ratio
exceeded a minimum cutoff (columns).

48. Many of the examples in this chapter will use imaginary daily returns of various arbitrary trading rule
variations. These fake returns are randomly generated with the kind of characteristics I want: expected
mean, standard deviation (from which we get the Sharpe ratio), and where relevant correlation with other
variations. I then run these tests many times and report the average result, so the answer is not influenced by
how each series of random numbers come out.

                                                                                                            59
Systematic Trading



Practically then what SR cutoff should I use? As none of the imaginary rules are truly
profitable ideally I wouldn’t accept any. But in real fitting situations we can’t set the bar
too high or even good rules will be discarded; after all a realistic SR for a real trading
rule, tested on one instrument, is only likely to be around 0.30. Let’s suppose I would
be happy with a 5% chance of picking out at least one rule that was truly unprofitable.
Also in the real world I’d usually have more than one year of data, so let’s see what effect
additional history has on my findings.
Table 4 has all the results. As you might have suspected the length of the return series is
very important here. More history means less chance of a zero SR rule getting a lucky
streak, so I can set the cutoff lower. However, even with 30 years of data I can’t risk testing
more than a handful of rules, and even then the cutoff is far too high when many perfectly
good variations will only have true Sharpe ratios of 0.3.


TABLE 4: WITH MORE HISTORY YOU CAN SET A LOWER SHARPE RATIO THRESHOLD TO AVOID
PICKING A BAD RULE FROM A LARGER POOL

                                         Years of data
      Number of
     rules tested           1            5            10           30
          1                1.5          0.7           0.5          0.4
          5               2.3            1.1          0.8          0.5
         10               2.8            1.2          0.8          0.6
         50               3.4            1.5          1.0          0.6
         100              3.4            1.5           1.1         0.7

The table shows the Sharpe ratio cutoff needed when testing a given size pool (rows) of
trading rules, with a certain amount of years of historical data (columns) to ensure you
only have a 5% chance of picking out one or more truly bad rules.



How much history do you need to decide if a rule is good?
You’ve now seen that a common mistake is to use insufficient historical data to select or
calibrate a rule. How much data do you need? How long do you need to decide if a rule
has a positive Sharpe ratio (SR) and is worth keeping?
To answer this I generated more random trading rule daily returns, this time assuming
an underlying positive Sharpe ratio, which again I wouldn’t know in advance. As more
trading history is generated I can estimate the SR each year and the average so far. At the
same time I look at the distribution of those annual Sharpe ratios.49 This allows me to get

49. For a more technical discussion of this issue, see Andrew Lo’s paper ‘The Statistics of Sharpe ratios’ in
Financial Analysts Journal 58:4, July/August 2002.
60
                                                                           Chapter Three. Fitting


a feel for how statistically significant my measured average SR is; was I just lucky or is this
really a good system?
A classic test for statistical significance is the T-Test. In this example it determines whether
an estimated Sharpe ratio is likely to be positive given the estimate of its mean and
standard deviation. The further away the mean is from zero, as measured in units of
sigma, the more likely the unknown SR is actually positive.
This test is commonly used with a threshold of two sigma. If an estimated average SR is
more than two standard deviations above zero there would only be a 2.5% chance of this
happening if the true SR was actually negative.
Figure 11 shows the evolution of the average measured SR for an arbitrary trading rule,
and around it the upper and lower ‘confidence intervals’. Each confidence interval is two
sigma away from the average, so when the lower interval pushes above zero I know there
is only a 2.5% chance the trading system is really a loss making rule in disguise.


FIGURE 11: WITH A TRUE SHARPE RATIO (SR) OF 0.5, IT TAKES MORE THAN TEN YEARS TO PASS
THE T-TEST AND CONCLUDE THE SR IS PROBABLY POSITIVE




In the figure you can see the average SR converging quickly on the true value of 0.5 SR.
But it takes over ten years before the lower confidence interval goes above zero and the
T-Test is finally passed. Only then can we be reasonably certain this is not a loss making
system.



                                                                                              61
Systematic Trading



If I repeat this for a rule with a true SR of 1.0 I get figure 12. The time to pass the test
here is just a few years. On average it will always take less time for higher SR strategies to
prove their profitability.


FIGURE 12: WITH A TRUE SHARPE RATIO OF 1.0 WE PASS THE T-TEST IN A FEW YEARS




Let’s find the average time to pass the test for a given true Sharpe ratio. After running
the necessary experiments I get table 5. Except for very good rules you need at least ten
years, and usually more, to be sure a strategy makes money.50 The average trading rule for
one instrument has a realistic SR of around 0.3; so you’d need nearly 40 years of history!


TABLE 5: IT TAKES DECADES OF DATA TO SEE IF MOST STRATEGIES ARE LIKELY TO BE
PROFITABLE

  True Sharpe ratio           0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5       0.7      1.0     1.5       2.0
  Average years to
                              45      37      33      20        10       6       3         1.4
  pass profit T-Test


The table shows average time in years to pass the T-Test for profitability given the true
Sharpe ratio of the trading rule.

50. These results also depend on the skew of returns. For example, with a true SR of 1.0 I needed about
three years’ more data for a typical negative skew volatility selling strategy to pass the T-Test, compared to a
positive skew trend following strategy.

62
                                                                                       Chapter Three. Fitting


How much history do you need to decide if one rule is better than another?
Now what if you have some alternative rules and want to find the best. Let’s suppose
I again have two random rules, one with a true Sharpe ratio (SR) of 0.30, and the
other an SR of 0.80. Initially I’m going to assume these are quite different rules with no
correlation between their returns. This time to perform the T-Test I need to estimate the
difference in the two Sharpe ratios, and measure the average and standard deviation of
that difference.


FIGURE 13: IT TAKES THREE DECADES TO DISCOVER THAT THIS SR 0.8 STRATEGY IS PROBABLY
BETTER THAN AN UNCORRELATED STRATEGY WITH SR 0.3




In figure 13 is the average difference in SR and the relevant confidence intervals for this
difference. Once the lower confidence interval goes above zero then we can be reasonably
certain that one rule is better, as again there is only a 2.5% probability of this happening
by chance. You can see from figure 13 that the time to certainty is around 30 years!
Table 6 shows the average time taken to pass the T-Test when comparing an SR 0.30
rule with one that truly has a higher SR. These results vary depending on the difference
in SR and the correlation of the rules. More closely related rules will be easier and
quicker to distinguish for a given SR difference.51 In practice distinguishing rules requires


51. More subtly the overall level of the Sharpes involved will also influence the results, as Andrew Lo’s paper
discusses. The skew of the rules is also important, even when comparing rules with similar skew.

                                                                                                            63
Systematic Trading



considerable historical data except for the rare cases of variations which are both highly
correlated, and also perform very differently.


TABLE 6: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH TRADING RULES GIVEN A FEW YEARS OF DATA? ONLY IF
THEY ARE HIGHLY CORRELATED AND ONE HEAVILY OUTPERFORMS THE OTHER

                                      Correlation between rules
     Sharpe ratio
      advantage          -1.0         0.0         0.5          0.8        0.95

         0.1              47          47           46          44          37

        0.25              46          45           40          32           10

         0.5              41          37           25          10           3

         1.0              23           11          8           2.5         0.5


The table shows the number of years needed for us to be reasonably certain that one rule
is better than another, given the SR advantage of the better rule (rows) and the correlation
between the trading returns of the two rules (columns).



Should you fit one trading rule for all instruments?
In 2010 the large systematic hedge fund in which I worked was reorganised into asset
classes. My team managed the fixed income portfolio, another ran equities and so on.
Initially the trading strategies we ran were fairly similar. However over time, as we did
more market specific research, we all became convinced that we needed to customise our
systems differently.
In many cases we went further and also began to fit different parts of our portfolios
separately. We might for example have fitted emerging and developed market bond
futures with different trading rule variations.52 Fitting separately is common, and many
system traders take this to the extreme and fit every instrument separately. Almost all
back-testing packages, such as the one Joe was using, default to fitting trading rules on
a single instrument at a time. So you would have one variation of a rule for the British
pound/dollar, another for euro/dollar and so on.
This is a classic example of the narrative fallacy, a cognitive bias we have seen before. To
our human minds it makes sense to have different stories, and so different trading rules,
for different instruments.


52. In reality we didn’t do this. Or did we? Unfortunately I can’t give real examples without breaking the
terms of my non-disclosure agreement.

64
                                                                                          Chapter Three. Fitting


But is this the right thing to do? It depends on whether the behaviour of each variation
over the various instruments is significantly different. If it isn’t then you’re likely to be
over-fitting by individually tailoring each rule for every instrument. In practice there
isn’t usually a statistical difference between different instruments, particularly if they are
closely related such as a group of equity index futures.53
In fact pooling your data and fitting multiple instruments together is an excellent way
of getting more data history, which gives you a better shot at being able to distinguish
profitable and loss making trading rules.
As an example I have two trading rules in my own portfolio which for a typical single
instrument have Sharpe ratios (SR) averaging 0.05 and 0.30 respectively. Despite being
perfectly uncorrelated, table 6 shows I’d need 45 years to distinguish them; almost
impossible when even the earliest financial futures only began trading in 1972. However
the same rules run on a portfolio of instruments have SR of 0.13 and 1.13.54 The table
shows I’d need just 11 years of data to distinguish these two Sharpe ratios from each other.
To make pooling easier you should design trading rules that are generic and can work
with any instrument. I’ll give some examples of generic rules in chapter seven, ‘Forecasts’.


Some rules for effective fitting
If you haven’t been warned off fitting, and insist on using data to select and calibrate
trading rules, then following this advice should keep you out of serious trouble. Those
who are now rightly terrified of fitting can skip ahead to the next section, where I show
you how I avoid fitting almost completely.

Keep it simple
I am not a fan of complex fitting methods and I prefer not to use them. But if you do
consider yourself an expert in a dark statistical art then naturally you would want to
practise it. Just be aware; the more complex the method the harder it will be to realise
when you are over-fitting.




53. There are some exceptions, notably when there are different trading costs for the instruments concerned,
which I’ll cover in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.
54. Technical note: These are the returns you’d get if you traded an equally weighted portfolio of instruments
using the same trading rule. The improvement in Sharpe ratio (SR) comes from the diversification effect
across instruments. The alternative method is to stitch consecutive series of instrument returns together. This
gives a very long history of returns, but the SR of the stitched series will be almost the same as the average
across individual instruments (it is not identical to the average because of the effect of varying lengths of price
series for different instruments).

                                                                                                                65
Systematic Trading



Fewer alternatives
As table 4 shows reducing the pool of trading rules and variations considered is crucial
unless you have many years of data.55

Ban time machines
You should always use rolling or expanding out of sample fitting. If using a rolling
window don’t make it too short; be aware of the number of years needed to distinguish
rules from random noise, and each other (tables 4, 5 and 6).

Don’t drop rules casually
Before picking one rule or variation and discarding others based on past performance,
look carefully at table 6. It’s unusual in reality to find highly correlated rules with radically
different performance. More likely you will find very different rules with perhaps a Sharpe
ratio (SR) difference of 0.5 but almost no correlation, or highly correlated rule variations
which are very similar in SR. In both cases you need 30 years of data to differentiate them.
It’s rare to have 30 years or more of price history, so it’s difficult to justify picking one rule
over another on performance alone.

Pool data across instruments
You’re going to need all the data you can to make good fitting decisions. The easiest
solution is to pool data from multiple instruments.
Only if there is a statistically significant difference in performance between various rules
across instruments should you fit them individually. In practice this is rarely necessary.

Compare apples with apples
I’ve assumed throughout this chapter that you will use Sharpe ratio (SR) to compare
rules. But comparing a positively skewed rule and a negatively skewed alternative purely
on SR is highly misleading, as negative skew rules will tend to have flatteringly high SR.

When the future won’t be like the past
Be careful of focusing on outright performance, rather than returns relative to benchmarks.
This is very dangerous because many asset classes, like equities and bonds, have done
extraordinarily well over the last 40 years or so. The easiest way to get extra back-tested
profits is to use trading rules which are more highly correlated with the underlying asset
class.

55. If you are using a more complex fitting technique then you need to keep your degrees of freedom
appropriately small.

66
                                                                          Chapter Three. Fitting


This is unlikely to work in the future as the main cause of these high returns was significant
falls in inflation; something that won’t be repeated.


How I choose my rules
There are many ways to navigate the fitting minefield. My own preference is to avoid it
almost completely, by selecting trading rules and variations without looking at actual
performance. I use the following process:
1. Come up with a small number of trading rules to exploit each idea I have about how
   the market behaves.
2. For each rule select a few variations. At this stage I am not looking at performance,
   but at behaviour such as trading speed and correlation with other variations.
3. Allocate forecast weights to each variation, taking uncertainty about Sharpe ratios
   into account. Poor rules will have lower weight, but are rarely entirely excluded.
This process means that I don’t use performance to fit trading rules and variations. Instead
returns data is reserved for finding forecast weights. These weights determine in what
proportion each variation is used to predict each instrument’s returns. The next chapter
will explain how this portfolio allocation can reduce the weight on apparently poor
variations without risking over-fitting.
Any variation that ends up with a negligible weight in the final portfolio can ultimately
be dropped from your live trading system, reducing the complexity of implementation.
This gives the same end result as excluding the rule earlier, but it means any back-tested
performance incorporating the excluded rule will be more realistic.

Start with a small number of ideas
I prefer to come up with a relatively small number of ideas for trading rules. In my own
portfolio I have eight rules drawn from five different themes, but if I was starting from
scratch I’d begin with just a couple of rules: the trend following and carry rules that I
will show you in chapter seven, ‘Forecasts’.
You should have a small number of rules because:
1. Less risk of over-fitting: Fewer ideas means less chance of over-fitting, and a lower
   critical Sharpe ratio is required before accepting a rule (table 4).
2. Many ways to skin the feline: One kind of market behaviour can be picked up in
   multiple ways. For example we can capture trends with momentum oscillators,
   divergence and breakout systems to name but a few. There is little value in having
   dozens of similar rules for one kind of behaviour.



                                                                                             67
Systematic Trading



3. Keep it simple: With my process all the rules will survive the selection process so
   starting with too many rules will create complexity in the trading system. Complex
   systems are more difficult to trust and understand.
Far too much time and effort is spent by both amateur and professional trading system
designers in looking for more, and better, trading rules. But the marginal value of
adding additional rules is low, especially if they are of the same trading style. The average
correlation between different rules trading a particular instrument is higher than
between instruments trading the same rule. So diversification amongst instruments is
preferable to rule diversification.
Adding new instruments is a tiresome task of uploading and checking data which is less
fun than coming up with more trading rules, but in my experience is of far more benefit.

Keep the right number of variations
Although I prefer to have relatively few trading rules I wouldn’t normally have just one
variation of any rule which can be calibrated. But there is no need to use 90 or more
possible combinations! For example if you’re trying to capture price momentum then you
will probably need a variation that captures relatively fast trends, one that captures very
slow moves and perhaps two to three in between.
If two of your variations have more than a 95% correlation you can safely drop one of
them since it will have almost no marginal benefit. You can also remove variations whose
trading costs will be too high, or which trade extremely slowly and so are unlikely to give
you significant returns. But do not drop variations purely because of their performance.

Don’t look at returns - yet
My preference is to reserve actual historic performance data for deciding which forecast
weights to give to trading rules and their variations. Done properly this can give you
realistic back-tested performance and still down-weight poor trading rules. But if you’ve
already used real data to pre-select only good rules then your back-test performance will
be too optimistic, and you’ll have over-fitted.
So at this stage it’s only behaviour such as correlation and likely trading costs you should
be looking at, not performance. You must avoid contaminating the back-test.
There isn’t much detail about this process here but there will be examples of how it works
later in the book. Whether you fit your trading rules, or use my hands off approach, the
next problem is to decide how much of rule X and how much of Y – and how much of
instrument A or B – to use in your trading system. This problem of portfolio allocation
is covered in the next chapter.




68
Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation

Staunch systems trader

Asset allocating investor
This chapter is about deciding how you share out your trading capital between
different instruments or trading rules. Deciding the allocation between
instruments is important for asset allocating investors, whilst staunch systems
traders have to make both kinds of decision.
It isn’t relevant if you’re a semi-automatic trader, since you won’t use systematic
trading rules and will trade different instruments opportunistically. You can skip
this chapter.


D     ECIDING HOW TO ALLOCATE WITHIN A PORTFOLIO OF ASSETS IS
      a problem every investor faces. How much in equities, bonds or cash? Should you
split your equity allocation evenly between countries or just stick it all in the USA?
Allocation decisions are equally important for systematic investors and traders. If you’re a
staunch systems trader running more than one trading rule, including any variations,
then you need to decide what forecast weights to use when you combine rules together
to forecast the price of each instrument.
Both staunch systems traders and asset allocating investors also need to decide
instrument weights; how much of your portfolio to put into the trading systems you
have for each instrument. Because the tools in this chapter are for making both kinds
of decision, I’ll refer to portfolios of generic assets, which could be either instruments or
trading rules. Later in the book I’ll show you specific examples of each of the two types
of allocation problem.
Just like trading rules, portfolio weights can be over-fitted. Optimising weights can give
you a portfolio which does really well in back-tests, but which fails badly when traded


                                                                                           69
Systematic Trading



in reality. Such portfolios are usually highly extreme; allocating to just a small subset of
the assets available. In this chapter I’ll show you how to avoid the pitfalls of these highly
undiversified portfolios.


Chapter overview

 Optimising gone bad           How classic portfolio optimisation can often result in over-
                               fitted extreme portfolio weights.

 Saving optimisation from      Some insights from an alternative technique, bootstrapping,
 itself                        which can help us understand what is going wrong.

 Making weights by hand        How to use a simple method called handcrafting to get
                               portfolio weights.

 Incorporating Sharpe          Using additional information about expected performance to
 ratios                        improve handcrafted weights.




Optimising gone bad

Introducing optimisation
Portfolio optimisation will find the set of asset weights which give the best expected risk
adjusted returns, usually measured by Sharpe ratio. The inputs to this are the expected
average returns, standard deviation of returns, and their correlation. The standard
method for doing this was first introduced by Harry Markowitz in the 1950s. It was a
neat and elegant solution to a complex problem.
Unfortunately it’s all too easy to be distracted by elegance, and forget the important
assumptions underlying the maths. As you will see below, blind use of this method
frequently results in ugly portfolios with extreme weights. Just because an equation is
wonderful to behold doesn’t mean you should slavishly use its results without thought of
the consequences. As Einstein said, “If you are out to describe the truth, leave elegance
to the tailor.”
In the early part of my career I was fatally distracted by the lovely equations and ended up
with some terrible portfolios, until I learned the error of my ways. Subsequently I often
had to review the allocation decisions made by researchers who were less experienced,
although undoubtedly cleverer and more academically qualified than myself.



70
                                                                           Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


When I asked one of these rocket scientists what they thought about the extreme portfolio
weights they’d found I often got a shrug. “These are what the optimiser came up with.”
The unspoken assumption was that the equation must be right. Hopefully after reading
this chapter you will be less accepting of attractive mathematics.

Some good news
Portfolio optimisation is hard. But there are a few difficulties that don’t arise when you’re
using it to design trading strategies. This is because you aren’t deciding directly how large
your positions in various instruments should be. Instead you’re deciding what weight
should be given to different parts of your trading system. These can either be the forecast
weights telling you in what proportion to use trading rule variations for a particular
instrument, or the instrument weights determining how much of your capital to allocate
for trading each instrument.
This gives you two advantages. Firstly, you can’t have negative weights in your portfolio;
you can’t short trading rules, so the lowest possible weight is zero. If a trading rule is
expected to lose money you shouldn’t include it at all.56 Secondly, using my framework
will mean that profits from your trading rules have identical expected standard deviation
of returns. This is because of the volatility standardisation I spoke about in chapter two,
‘Systematic Trading Rules’. By using this technique you simplify the problem and only
need to use expected Sharpe ratios and correlations to work out your weights.
Although you won’t be optimising the underlying positions in individual assets like
equities or bonds in your trading systems, I will be using portfolios of simple assets in
this chapter to make the examples more straightforward. However to make it easier to
interpret the results I will adjust asset returns before any calculations so that they have
the same standard deviation as you’ll have when you work with trading system returns.

The unstable world of portfolio weights
Let’s take a simple example of allocating capital between three assets: the NASDAQ
and S&P 500 US stock indices, and the US 20 year benchmark bond. I am using data
from January 1999 to mid-2014 and all returns are volatility standardised to have the
same expected standard deviation. Each year from January 2000 onwards I’m going to
use returns from all previous years to calculate some optimal weights.57 Because each
optimisation uses all available data to create a single set of weights I call this a single
period optimisation.



56. A rule with a significantly negative Sharpe ratio either has very high trading costs and should be omitted,
or it is consistently wrong and so should be inverted with longs and shorts reversed before incorporating
it into the portfolio (although you’ll probably also want to consider the logic of your original idea before
proceeding).
57. If you read the previous chapter you should recognise this as an out of sample expanding window.

                                                                                                            71
Systematic Trading



The calculation is done using the classic Markowitz optimisation; I find the maximum
risk adjusted return (e.g. Sharpe ratio) using the estimated means and correlations, and
standard deviations (which are all identical because I’ve used volatility standardisation).
I also don’t allow weights to be negative and they have to sum up to exactly 100%.
Figure 14 shows the weights calculated for each year.58 In the last throes of the late
1990s tech boom I naturally put all my money into the fast rising NASDAQ. This then
implodes, and is permanently removed from the portfolio. For much of the remaining
period I put my entire capital in bonds. At the end I only have 25% in equities, all of
which is in the S&P 500. This is a very extreme portfolio, with very unstable weights.


FIGURE 14: SINGLE PERIOD OPTIMISATION USUALLY MEANS EXTREME WEIGHTS




The figure shows the portfolio weights produced by single period optimisation done each
year on all previous data.


Not all statistical estimates are created equal
Faced with such nightmares a natural reaction is to discard any hope of optimising. Perhaps
we should just allocate equally to all the assets we have. Many academic researchers have


58. Remember these are displayed as if all assets had the same standard deviation. So in practice roughly
twice as much actual money would be allocated to bonds than shown here, due to their lower volatility.

72
                                                                          Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


also come to this conclusion and there is plenty of evidence that equal weights are hard
to beat.59

When do equal weights make sense?60
1. Same volatility: If all assets had the same expected standard deviation of returns. This
   is always the case for the volatility standardised assets we’re using.
2. Same Sharpe ratio: If all assets had the same expected Sharpe ratio (SR).
3. Same correlation: If all assets had the same expected co-movement of returns.
If these assumptions aren’t correct, then what should your portfolio look like?61

What kind of portfolio should we have with...
1. Same Sharpe ratio and correlation: Equal weights.
2. Significantly different Sharpe ratio (SR): Larger weights for assets that are expected to
   have higher SR, smaller for low SR.
3. Significantly different correlation: Larger weights for highly diversifying assets which
   have lower correlations to other assets, and smaller for less diversifying assets.
Let’s see if these assumptions are true in the simple example. Figure 15 shows the
distribution of Sharpe ratios for each of the three assets. Notice that the lines mostly
overlap; this means we can’t distinguish between the historic performance of each asset.
Although bonds did have a higher average SR the advantage isn’t statistically significant.
If you read the previous chapter, and remember table 6, it is no surprise that the 15 years
of data isn’t enough to say with confidence which asset had the best SR.




59. For example see DeMiguel, Victor, Lorenzo Garlappi and Raman Uppal, ‘Optimal versus naive
diversification: How inefficient is the 1/N portfolio strategy?’, Review of Financial Studies 2009.
60. To be pedantic there are some unusual portfolios where equal weights are optimal that don’t fulfill these
criteria, but they aren’t relevant here.
61. The portfolios examined by academic researchers mostly consisted of equities from the same country,
which tend to have similar standard deviation and correlations. In this situation equal weights will indeed
be hard to beat.

                                                                                                          73
Systematic Trading



FIGURE 15: HARDER TO DISTINGUISH SHARPE RATIOS THAN YOU THINK




The figure shows the distribution of Sharpe ratios for the three assets in my example
portfolio.
On the contrary, we can often distinguish different correlations. Figure 16 shows the
distribution of correlations in my simple example. You should be able to easily pick apart
the correlated equities and the diversifying bond asset.
So in the simple example I should be able to do better than equal weights, as there is
significant data about correlations. A good portfolio would have more of the diversifying
bond asset than the equities, but wouldn’t take much account of the insignificantly
different Sharpe ratios. However the classic optimiser doesn’t work like this, because
it can’t see all the information in figures 15 and 16. It uses only the average SR and
correlation, not knowing or caring how much uncertainty there is in each estimate.




74
                                                               Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


FIGURE 16: EQUITIES CLEARLY CORRELATED WITH EACH OTHER, AND NEGATIVELY WITH
BONDS




The figure shows the distribution of correlations for pairs of the three assets in my example
portfolio.



Saving optimisation from itself
How can we fix this problem? I have two techniques that I use. The first, which is quite
hard work, is called bootstrapping. This involves repeating my optimisation many times
over different parts of the data, taking the resulting weights, and averaging them out.
So the weights are the average of many optimisations, rather than one optimisation on the
average of all data.
The justification for bootstrapping is simple. I believe that the past is a good guide to
the future, but I don’t know which part of the past will be repeated. To hedge my bets I
assume there is an equal chance of seeing any particular historical period repeated. So it’s
logical to use an average of all the portfolios which did best in previous periods.
Bootstrapping has some nice advantages over classic optimisation. Most of the individual
optimisations have extreme weights. However with enough of them it’s unlikely the
average will be extreme. If I have noisy data, and the past contains periods which were very
different, then the optimal portfolios will be close to equal weights. But with significant
differences in Sharpe ratios or correlations similar portfolios will crop up repeatedly,


                                                                                              75
Systematic Trading



and the average will reflect that. The averaged weights naturally reflect the amount of
uncertainty that the data has.
Let’s see the results of running an expanding window bootstrap optimisation on our
simple three asset portfolio. Figure 17 shows the results over time, whilst table 7 compares
the final weights with a classic single period optimisation and equal weights.62 After
the first year the weights are relatively stable, and for all periods less extreme than for the
single period method. However the diversifying allocation to bonds is greater than with
equal weights, so this portfolio should do better.


FIGURE 17: BOOTSTRAPPED PORTFOLIO WEIGHTS: STABLE AND EVENLY SPREAD




The figure shows the portfolio weights I get over time from using the bootstrap method
on the example assets.




62. This is the result of using 100 bootstraps, each 1 year in length, with daily returns drawn randomly with
replacement.

76
                                                               Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


TABLE 7: BOOTSTRAPPED WEIGHTS ARE MORE EVEN THAN THE SINGLE PERIOD METHOD, BUT
ACCOUNT FOR CORRELATIONS BETTER THAN EQUAL WEIGHTS

                          Equal weight       Single period       Bootstrapped

 US 20 year bond               33%                68%                53%

 S&P 500 equities              33%                32%                27%

 NASDAQ equities               33%                0%                 20%


The table shows the final portfolio weights using equal weights and after optimising using
both single period and bootstrapped methods with an expanding window.


Bootstrapping requires a suitable software package, the ability to write your own
optimisation code, or a black belt in spread-sheeting. If you are interested in this technique
there are more details in appendix C. Meanwhile I’m going to show you the second, much
simpler, way I use to get robust portfolio weights.


Making weights by hand
Something weird happens if you ask an experienced and skilled expert in portfolio
optimisation, but not one who uses bootstrapping, to do some work for you. Under your
gaze they will pull out their optimisation software and diligently produce some weights.
As we’ve seen these are inevitably awful, with many assets having zero weights and one or
two having huge allocations. The artisan will then suggest you go for a coffee whilst they
do their magic.
When you return the weights have suspiciously changed; they’re now much nicer and less
extreme. Upon interrogation the expert will admit they have tortured the software with
all kinds of arcane tricks until it produced the right result. Experts know from glancing at
the problem roughly what a good answer should look like, and their skill lies in extracting
it from the computer.
I remember once being told “Optimisation is more of an art than a science.” This never
seemed particularly satisfying. I would have preferred a process that always produced
exactly the same result for the same data set, regardless of who was operating the machinery.
After leaving the financial industry I set myself the task of creating my own trading
system, which naturally meant doing some optimisation. As it would take time to write
the necessary code for bootstrapping I thought I’d use the simpler single period method
for my first attempt. I soon found myself with weights I didn’t like, and true to form began
fiddling to improve them. After toying with the optimiser for a few minutes, I quickly



                                                                                              77
Systematic Trading



realised it would be better to cut out the artistic pseudo-optimisation stage entirely. Why
not just write down the right weights to start with?
The only tool required would be a sharp pencil, and something like the back of an envelope
or a beer mat to write on. A little harder was defining exactly what ‘good’ weights would
look like for a given portfolio.
I started with small portfolios. For simple situations where equal weights were justified
this was easy. To deal with more difficult groups I used the results from experiments on
artificial data with the bootstrapping method.
To cope with larger portfolios I made the problem modular. So I first worked on subsets
of the portfolio which I formed into groups, and then calculated the weight of each group
relative to others. If necessary I used more than one level of grouping depending on how
complicated the problem was.
The handcrafting method was born. Let’s see how it works in more detail.

Handcrafting method
The procedure involves constructing the portfolio in a bottom-up fashion by first forming
groups of similar assets. Within and across groups you set allocations using a table of
optimal weights for similar portfolios. These weights come from my own experiments
with bootstrapping.
As you would expect the method assumes that all assets have the same expected standard
deviation of returns. I also assume, for now, that they also have the same Sharpe ratio
(SR). I’ll relax that assumption later, but as you saw above and perhaps in the last chapter
it’s quite common to be unable to find statistically significant differences between the
Sharpe ratios of assets.
So all you need is an idea of what correlations are likely to be. As you’ll see these don’t
need to be precise, and you can either estimate them with historical data or take an
educated guess given the nature of the assets in your portfolio. If you don’t want to do
your own guessing then tables 50 to 57 in appendix C show some rough correlations
between the returns of different instruments, and sets of different trading rules for the
same instrument.
Once you have your correlations you need to group the most highly correlated assets
together. Except with unusual portfolios the groupings will normally be pretty obvious;
so for example in a Nikkei stock portfolio you’d probably put all Japanese utility stocks
together, all banks together and so on.
Groups should ideally contain only one, two or three assets, but more is okay if their
correlations are similar enough. Within these small groups there are only a limited
number of distinctive correlation patterns that really matter.



78
                                                                      Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


The correct weights for these patterns are shown in table 8. If the exact correlation value
isn’t shown then you should round to the closest relevant number.63 Negative values
should be floored at zero.64 The three asset correlations shown are those between assets A
and B, A and C, and B and C respectively. These give the weights shown for assets A, B
and C respectively.


TABLE 8: GROUP WEIGHTS TO USE WHEN HANDCRAFTING PORTFOLIOS


               Group of one asset                     1              100% to that asset

            Any group of two assets                  2               50% to each asset

   Any size group with identical correlations        3                 Equal weights

     Four or more assets without identical           4       Split groups further or differently
                 correlations                                  until they match another row

  Three assets with correlations AB, AC, BC                         Weights for A, B, C

        3 assets correlation 0.0, 0.5, 0.0           5           Weights: 30%, 40%, 30%

        3 assets correlation 0.0, 0.9, 0.0           6            Weights: 27%, 46%, 27%

        3 assets correlation 0.5, 0.0, 0.5           7            Weights: 37%, 26%, 37%

        3 assets correlation 0.0, 0.5, 0.9           8            Weights: 45%, 45%, 10%

        3 assets correlation 0.9, 0.0, 0.9           9            Weights: 39%, 22%, 39%

        3 assets correlation 0.5, 0.9, 0.5           10          Weights: 29%, 42%, 29%

        3 assets correlation 0.9, 0.5, 0.9           11           Weights: 42%, 16%, 42%



Numbers in bold in middle of table are used to identify rows.


Note that there are other permutations of these correlations which aren’t shown here
that would just be a re-ordering of a set of values included in the table. So for example
suppose your portfolio has three assets: US bonds (D), S&P 500 (E) and NASDAQ (F);
with correlations of -0.3 (DE), -0.2 (DF) and 0.8 (EF); which you would round to 0.0
(DE), 0.0 (DF), 0.9 (EF).

63. Alternatively some interpolation of weights could be done, but this makes this simple method rather
complicated.
64. An asset with a negative correlation would get an unreasonably extreme allocation.

                                                                                                     79
Systematic Trading



After reordering and mapping to ABC in the table the relevant row number 6 is 0.0 (DE
mapping to AB), 0.9 (EF mapping to AC), 0.0 (DF mapping to BC) giving weights of
27% (A), 46% (B), 27% (C). Expressing that back in the original problem (E=A, D=B,
F=C) the weights are US Bonds 46% (D), S&P 500 27% (E) and NASDAQ 27% (F).65
Let’s think about the intuition of where these weights come from. Equities aren’t
very diversifying since they have a correlation of 0.90 with each other. But bonds are
uncorrelated with the two equity indices, so add more diversification to the portfolio. So
it makes sense that they get a higher weight, and the weight of the equities sinks lower.
Once every group has been processed you then allocate weights to groups, based on your
guess or estimate of the correlation between groups.66 Finally the weight of each asset in
the overall portfolio is just the total weight of its group multiplied by the weight it has
within the group.
Depending on the size and structure of the portfolio this process could be done with two
levels as explained here, at just one level if all the assets fall readily into table 8 without
needing subgroups, or with three or more levels.
To see how grouping works consider again the three asset portfolio of US bonds, S&P
500 and NASDAQ. Common sense and the correlations estimated above imply I should
create one group for the single bond asset, and a second group for the two equity indices.
Here is how I calculated the weights. The row numbers shown refer to the relevant rows
of table 8.


  First level grouping            Group one (bonds): One asset, gets 100%. Row 1.
  Within asset classes            Group two (equities): Two assets, I place 50% in each. Row 2.

  Second level grouping           I have two groups to allocate to, each gets 50%. Row 2.
  Across asset classes




Each equity index gets 50% (within group weight) multiplied by 50% (weight of group)
which is 25%. The one bond asset gets the other 50%. The weights are shown in figure 9.
They are fairly close to the ungrouped handcrafted weights, and to what the full bootstrap
method gave us in its final iteration – despite both handcrafting methods taking only a
few seconds and needing no computing power. Because I didn’t use Sharpe ratios there
isn’t the slight overweight on bonds and S&P 500 that we have in the bootstrapped
results. I’ll address that shortcoming below.
65. If you didn’t enjoy the mapping and un-mapping process you can find a larger table of weights on my
website that doesn’t require untangling in this way.
66. If you are going to use estimation then you would need to construct mini-portfolios for each group and
back-test them to get their returns. Alternatively you can use the average (simple or weighted by intra group
weights) of the correlation between the group members.

80
                                                           Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


TABLE 9: HANDCRAFTED WEIGHTS ARE SIMILAR TO BOOTSTRAPPED WEIGHTS, BUT WITH
LESS WORK

                     Equal     Single    Bootstrapped     Handcrafted       Handcrafted
                     weight    period                     ungrouped          grouped

 US 20 year bond      33%       68%           53%             46%                50%

 S&P 500 equities     33%        32%          27%             27%                25%

 NASDAQ equities      33%        0%           20%             27%                25%


The table shows the final portfolio weights using equal weights, after optimising using
both single period and bootstrapped methods with expanding windows, and using
handcrafting without and with grouping.



A more complex example
Now for a harder challenge. Suppose I have a portfolio of three UK banks (Barclays,
HSBC and RBS), two UK retailers (Tesco and Sainsburys), three US banks (JP Morgan,
Citigroup and Bank of America), three US retailers (Safeway, Walmart and Costco), two
UK government bonds (5 year and 10 year) and three US bonds (2 year, 20 year and
30 year). I grouped these, from the lowest grouping upwards as follows: equity sector,
country and asset class, giving the grouping in table 10.




                                                                                          81
Systematic Trading



TABLE 10: GROUPING FOR LARGER EXAMPLE PORTFOLIO
                       1st level              2nd level        3rd level           4th level
Barclays
HSBC                  UK banks
RBS                                       UK equities
Tesco
                     UK retailers
Sainsbury
JP Morgan                                                      Equities
Citigroup             US banks
Bank of America
                                          US equities                           Whole portfolio
Safeway
Walmart              US retailers
Costco
10 year UK bond
                                   UK bonds
20 year UK bond
2 year US bond                                                  Bonds
20 year US bond                    US bonds
30 year US bond




Here is how I calculated the weights. Relevant rows of table 8 are shown.


 First level grouping        Within equities I’m going to assume stocks have similar
 By equity industry          correlations if they’re within the same industry and country.
 within country, by bond     • UK banks: Assuming similar correlations allocate 33.3% to each.
 country                     Row 3.
                             • UK retail: Two assets so allocate 50% to each. Row 2.
                             • US banks: Similar correlations so allocate 33.3%. Row 3.
                             • US retail: Similar correlations so allocate 33.3%. Row 3.
                             • UK bonds: Two assets so allocate 50% to each. Row 2.
                             • US bonds: For the three US bonds things are a little more
                             complex. From table 55 (page 294) the 2 year and 20 year
                             bonds typically have 0.5 correlation, 2 year/30 year 0.5 and 20
                             year/30 year 0.9. This matches row 10 of table 8, giving weights
                             of 42% in the 2 year bond and 29% in each of the 20 and 30
                             year bonds.




82
                                                               Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation



 Second level grouping      • UK equities: Two groups (UK banks and UK retailers) so allocate
 By country within asset    50% to each. Row 2.
 class                      • US equities: Two groups (US banks and US retailers) so allocate
                            50% to each. Row 2.
                            • UK bonds: 100% as only one group. Row 1.
                            • US bonds: 100%, one group. Row 1.

 Third level grouping       Equities: Two groups (US equities and UK equities) so allocate
 By asset class             50% to each. Row 2.
                            Bonds: Two groups (US and UK bonds) so allocate 50% to each.
                            Row 2.

 Fourth level grouping      Two grouped assets (bonds and equities) allocate 50% to each.
 Across asset classes       Row 2.




Final weights
The final weights for each asset, from multiplying the weights they are given at each
grouping stage, are shown in table 11.
Notice I mostly didn’t use correlations except in the US bonds group. If you can keep your
groups down to one or two members, or your group members are similarly correlated,
then you don’t need to use correlations once you’ve determined your groups.
With 16 assets equal weights would have come out at 6.25% each. This was an unbalanced
portfolio with more equities than bonds, and where it was unrealistic to assume identical
correlations. In this situation we should be able to beat equal weights by giving more
allocation to more diversifying assets.




                                                                                              83
Systematic Trading



TABLE 11: CONSTRUCTION OF WEIGHTS IN LARGER EXAMPLE PORTFOLIO

                          1st         2nd          3rd        4th         Final

  Barclays                33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  HSBC                    33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  RBS                     33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  Tesco                   50%         50%          50%        50%         6.3%

  Sainsbury               50%         50%          50%        50%         6.3%

  JP Morgan               33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  Citigroup               33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  Bank of America         33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  Safeway                 33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  Walmart                 33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  Costco                  33%         50%          50%        50%         4.2%

  10 year UK bond         50%         100%         50%        50%         12.5%

  20 year UK bond         50%         100%         50%        50%         12.5%

  2 year US bond          42%         100%         50%        50%         10.5%

  20 year US bond         29%         100%         50%        50%         7.3%

  30 year US bond         29%         100%         50%        50%         7.3%


Calculation of weights is shown for each grouping stage, and in the last column we have
the final portfolio weight, which is the product of the weights for each stage. Borders show
grouping. There is some rounding.



Are we cheating?
The handcrafting method cannot easily be repeated automatically in multiple years, so
is unsuitable for an expanding or rolling out of sample back-test.67 You fit one single
in sample set of portfolio weights, with knowledge of all past data. Arguably there is a
danger that the resulting portfolio will be over-fitted. This is more likely if you’re using


67. Actually it is possible to back-test the handcrafting method, and I have done so to validate it, but it
requires historical estimates of correlation using only past data and an algorithm to cluster groups into a
hierarchy. If you must use a back-tested method then the bootstrap method is much easier to implement.
After all, the main benefit of handcrafting is its simplicity.

84
                                                                Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


estimated correlations, although it’s also an issue with correlations that are educated
guesses, since both imply you knew the future at the start of the back-test.
Relax; you will be using information from the future but in mitigation the weights you’ll
produce will be much less extreme than an in sample single period optimisation will
produce. Also correlations usually don’t move enough that handcrafted weights would be
dramatically different over time. So the weights you will produce using all data are likely
to be very similar if you do them earlier in the back-test using only past data. Also for now
the method ignores differences in Sharpe ratio (SR), which also ensures weights are not
extreme and relatively stable.
To illustrate this I fitted the trading system I outline in chapter fifteen for staunch systems
traders. Using in sample handcrafting rather than rolling out of sample bootstrapping
gave an insignificant advantage (Sharpe ratio of 0.54 rather than 0.52). In comparison in
sample single period optimisation produced an unrealistically high SR of 0.84; although
when I used the single period method to perform a rolling out of sample fit it did much
worse, with an SR of 0.3.
Nevertheless the results of back-testing handcrafted portfolios should be treated with
slightly more scepticism than a true out of sample method like bootstrapping.


Incorporating Sharpe ratios
The basic handcrafting method assumes all assets have the same expected Sharpe
ratio (SR). Usually you don’t have enough data to determine whether historic SR were
significantly different. However there might be times when you have a valid opinion
about relative asset Sharpes.
One example which I’ll return to later is when some assets have higher costs than others.
Costs are known with much more certainty than raw performance, so you can usually
have a statistically well informed opinion about their effect on returns.
Another scenario is where you are following my recommended procedure for trading
rule selection outlined in the previous chapter. With my preferred method you don’t
remove unprofitable trading rules before deciding what their forecast weights should be.
However if a rule is terrible in back-test you’ll want to reduce its weight, although it will
probably have some allocation, since it’s hard to find sufficient evidence that one rule is
definitely better or worse than another (as covered in the last chapter).
By experimenting with random data I calculated how bootstrapped portfolio weights
change in a group of assets whose true SR are not equal. These adjustments can then be
applied to handcrafted weights. These results are below in table 12. To avoid showing
infinite permutations the results are in relative terms, so it’s the SR relative to the average
for the group that matters.



                                                                                               85
Systematic Trading



TABLE 12: HOW MUCH SHOULD YOU ADJUST HANDCRAFTED WEIGHTS BY IF YOU HAVE SOME
INFORMATION ABOUT ASSET SHARPE RATIOS?


                                          Adjustment factor

       SR              (A) With            (B) Without            (C) Without
 difference to       certainty e.g.   certainty, more than    certainty, less than
    average              costs           ten years’ data        ten years’ data
     -0.50               0.32                0.65                     1.0
     -0.40               0.42                0.75                     1.0
     -0.30               0.55                0.83                     1.0
      -0.25              0.60                0.85                     1.0
     -0.20               0.66                0.88                     1.0
      -0.15              0.77                0.92                     1.0
      -0.10              0.85                0.95                     1.0
     -0.05               0.94                0.98                     1.0
        0                1.00                 1.00                    1.0
      0.05                1.11                1.03                    1.0
      0.10                1.19                1.06                    1.0
      0.15               1.30                 1.09                    1.0
      0.20                1.37                1.13                    1.0
      0.25               1.48                 1.15                    1.0
      0.30               1.56                 1.17                    1.0
      0.40                1.72                1.25                    1.0
      0.50                1.83                1.35                    1.0



The table shows the adjustment factor to use for handcrafted weights given the Sharpe
ratio (SR) of an asset versus portfolio average (rows), certainty of SR estimate and
amount of data used to estimate (columns). Column A: SR difference is known precisely,
e.g. different trading costs. Column B: SR estimated using more than ten years of data or
forecasted. Column C: SR estimated using less than ten years of data.


Initially my experiments assumed I knew the true SR difference. For cost adjustments
this is a fair assumption. Column A shows the adjustment factor to multiply the starting
portfolio weights by when we know differences with complete certainty.



86
                                                                  Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


However if you are using historical estimates of SR, or forecasting them in some other way,
then you can’t be as confident. You should use the less aggressive adjustment factors in
column B. Finally if you’re estimating SR based on less than ten years of data I advise not
adjusting at all. As you might have seen in the last chapter estimates of SR are extremely
unlikely to be statistically different after only a few years. Though it’s trivial I’ve put this
in column C of the table.

Follow these steps to adjust handcrafted weights for Sharpe ratio

 Starting weights             Work out the handcrafted weights for the group. These will add
                              up to 100%.

 Get Sharpe ratios            In each group using historical data, cost estimates, or some other
                              method, find the expected SR for each asset.

 Sharpe versus average        Calculate the average SR for the entire group and then work out
                              the relative difference higher or lower than this for each asset.

 Get multiplier               Find the weight multiplier for each asset from column A, B or
                              C in table 12, depending on how certain you are about the SR
                              estimate, and if relevant how much data was used.

 Multiply                     Multiply each of the weights in the group by the relevant
                              multiplier.

 Normalise                    The resulting weights in the group may not add up to 100%. If
                              necessary normalise the weights so they sum to exactly 100%.




If you have two or more levels of grouping you’ll need to repeat this process. When you
move up to the next level you should estimate the SR of each group as a whole. You can
do this by back-testing each group’s returns, taking a weighted average of the SR for each
individual asset in the group, or just using a simple average SR across the group’s assets.
The process for adjusting group weights is then the same as for within groups.

A simple example
Let’s return to the simple three asset portfolio of two US equity and one bond market,
using handcrafting with groups. My historic estimates of Sharpe ratios are around 0 for
NASDAQ, 0.5 for S&P 500 and 0.75 for bonds. Here is what I did with the equity group
(the bond group is still just 100% in a single asset):




                                                                                                   87
Systematic Trading



 Starting weights         NASDAQ: 50%, S&P 500: 50%

 Estimate Sharpes         NASDAQ: 0, S&P 500: 0.5 (from historical data)

 Sharpe versus average    Average: 0.25. Difference to average:
                          • NASDAQ 0 - 0.25 = -0.25
                          • S&P 500 0.5 - 0.25 = 0.25

 Get multiplier           I have uncertain estimates with over ten years of data so I use
                          column B of table 12:
                          • NASDAQ: 0.85
                          • S&P 500: 1.15

 Multiply                 NASDAQ: 50% × 0.85 = 42%
                          S&P 500: 50% × 1.15 = 58%

 Normalise                Total is 100% so no normalisation required.




Now for the second level where I mix bonds and equities


 Starting weights         Equities: 50%, Bonds: 50%

 Guess Sharpes            Equities: using a simple average of NASDAQ with SR of 0 and
                          S&P 500 with SR 0.5, I get an average of 0.25
                          Bonds: 0.75 from historical data.

 Sharpe versus average    Average across bonds and equities: 0.50. Difference to average:
                          • Equities 0.25 - 0.50 = -0.25
                          • Bonds 0.75 - 0.50 = 0.25

 Get multiplier           From column B of table 12:
                          • Equities: 0.85
                          • Bonds: 1.15

 Multiply                 Equities: 50% × 0.85 = 42%
                          Bonds: 50% × 1.15 = 58%

 Normalise                Total is 100% so no normalisation required.




88
                                                                          Chapter Four. Portfolio Allocation


The final weights then are 18% NASDAQ (42% × 42%), 24% to S&P 500 (58% × 42%)
and 58% to bonds. Though more uneven than before they are much less extreme than
what I’d get with a single period optimiser using the same SR figures, as table 9 shows.
They’re also not dissimilar to my final bootstrapped weights, which also use Sharpe ratios
in their calculation.


TABLE 13: HOW MUCH OF AN EFFECT DOES INCLUDING SHARPE RATIOS (SR) HAVE ON
OPTIMISED PORTFOLIO WEIGHTS?

                             Single period        Bootstrapped        Handcrafted:        Handcrafted:
                               (uses SR)            (uses SR)            no SR              using SR

  US 20 year bond                  68%                 53%                 50%                 58%

  S&P 500 equities                 32%                 27%                 25%                 24%

  NASDAQ equities                  0%                  20%                 25%                 18%


When I bring in Sharpe ratio estimates, handcrafting up-weights better performing assets
and produces similar results to bootstrapping, but does not result in extreme portfolios
like single period optimisation.



Once again, are we cheating?
Now you’re using Sharpe ratios (SR) to produce your handcrafted weights it’s worth
reiterating that this is a mild form of in-sample back-test cheating, since you only use
the final SR averaged over all data history, which you wouldn’t have at the beginning of
the back-test.68
Again this is a fair criticism, but the problem is not that serious. The weights are still not
extreme, so the effect on back-tested SR you get is modest compared to in-sample single
period optimisation. However you should still be cautious of assuming that you’d be
able to achieve the back-test SR in live trading. Table 14 shows you roughly how much
you should degrade back-tested returns to get realistic achievable Sharpe ratios given a
particular fitting technique for a system like the one I describe in chapter fifteen.




68. As with the standard handcrafted weights it’s possible to back-test this by doing the SR adjustment on
an expanding window. For the first ten years of data you shouldn’t adjust the weights at all. After that you
should use only past data to estimate the SR at each point in the back-test. But again this is much more work
than using the bootstrapping method.

                                                                                                          89
Systematic Trading



TABLE 14: WITH HOW MANY PINCHES OF SALT SHOULD WE TREAT BACK-TESTED SHARPE
RATIOS?

                                                      Pessimism
                                                        factor

 Single period optimisation, uses SR, in sample          25%

 Single period optimisation, uses SR, out of sample      75%

 Bootstrapping, uses SR, in sample                      60%

 Bootstrapping, uses SR, out of sample                   75%

 Handcrafted, no SR used, in sample                      70%

 Handcrafted, uses SR, in sample                         65%


The table shows what proportion of back-tested returns are likely to be available
in the future. Numbers shown are for the trading system in chapter fifteen, which has
four trading rule variations and six instruments. More complicated trading systems will
require larger corrections for overstated in sample performance. I assume 25% of past
performance was due to unrepeatable secular trends in asset prices, as I discussed in
chapter two (page 46).


Now you should be able to use fitting and optimisation safely we can move on to part
three: my framework for trading systems.




90
 PART THREE.


Framework
Chapter Five. Framework Overview

N     OW YOU HAVE SOME THEORY AND PERHAPS A FEW QUANTITATIVE
      tools at your disposal you are ready to begin creating trading systems. In part three
of this book I am going to describe a framework which will provide you with a template
for the creation of almost any kind of strategy.


Chapter overview

 A bad example                       A trading system with some fatal flaws.

 Why use a modular framework         The reasons why a modular framework makes sense
                                     for systematic trading strategies.

 The elements of the framework       A brief road map of the various components in the
                                     framework.




The following chapters in part three will describe each component in more detail. In the
final part of the book I’ll show three examples of how this framework can be used, for
semi-automatic traders, asset allocating investors and staunch systems traders.




                                                                                         93
Systematic Trading



A bad example
69. This is a hypothetical example and as far as I know isn’t identical to any publicly available system.
Here’s an example of the kind of trading system you find in many books and websites.69




94
                                                                          Chapter Five. Framework Overview



  Entry rule                     Buy when the 20 day moving average rises over the 40 day, and
                                 vice versa.

  Exit rule                      Reverse when the entry rule is broken, so if you are long close when
                                 the 20 day moving average falls behind the 40 day and go short.

  Position size                  Never trade more than 10 Eurodollar futures, 1 FTSE contract or £10
                                 per spread bet point.

  Money management               Never bet more than 3% of your capital on each trade.

  Stop loss                      Set a trailing stop to close once you have lost 3% of your capital. If
                                 you find yourself triggering stops too frequently, then widen them.




I am not going to discuss the entry or exit rule.70 However the position sizing, money
management and stop loss are a mess.
Firstly why 3%? Will this generate the right amount of risk? What if I’m particularly
conservative, should I still use 3%? If I don’t like a particular trade that much, what
should I bet? I typically have 40 positions in my portfolio, so should I be putting 40 lots
of 3% of my portfolio at risk at any one time (meaning 120% of my total portfolio is at
risk)? Does 3% make sense if I am using a slower trading rule?
The position sizes above might make sense for someone with an account size of perhaps
£50,000 and a certain risk appetite, but what about everyone else? They might be correct
when the book was written, but are they still right when we read it five years later? What
about an instrument that isn’t listed, can we trade it? How?
Finally, setting a stop loss based solely on your capital and personal pain threshold is
incorrect.71 Someone with a tiny account who hated losing money would be triggering
their very tight stops after a few minutes, whilst a large hedge fund might close a losing
position after decades. Stops that would make sense in oil futures would be completely
wrong in the relatively quiet USD/CAD FX market. A stop that was correct in the
peaceful calm of 2006 would be absurdly tight in the insanity we saw in 2008.
The solution is to separate out the components of your system: trading rules (including
explicit or implicit stop losses), position sizing, and the calculation of your volatility


70. The rules aren’t too bad, as they are purely systematic and very simple. However they are binary (you’re
either fully in or out) which isn’t ideal, and having only one trading rule variation is also less than perfect.
71. This is recognised by most good traders. Here is Jack Schwager, in Hedge Fund Wizards, interviewing
hedge fund manager Colm O’Shea: Jack: “So you don’t use stops?” Colm: “No I do. I just set them wide
enough. In those early days I wasn’t setting stops at levels that made sense on the underlying hypothesis of the
trade. I was setting stops based on my pain threshold. When I get out of a trade now it is because I was wrong.
... Prices are inconsistent with my hypothesis. I’m wrong and I need to get out and rethink the situation.” (My
emphasis.)

                                                                                                             95
Systematic Trading



target (the average amount of cash you are willing to risk). You can then design each
component independently of the other moving parts.
Trading rules and stop losses should be based only on expected market price volatility,
and should never take your account size into consideration. Calculating a volatility
target, how much of your capital to put at risk, is a function of account size and your
pain threshold.72 Positions should then be sized based on how volatile markets are, how
confident your price forecasts are, and the amount of capital you wish to gamble.
Each of these components is part of the modular framework which together form a
complete trading system.


Why a modular framework?
Remember that I drew an analogy between cars and trading systems in the introduction
of this book. Trading rules are the engine of the system. These give you a forecast for
instrument prices; whether they are expected to go up or down and by how much.In
a car the chassis, drive train and gearbox translate the power the engine is producing
into forward movement. Similarly, you will have a position risk management framework
wrapped around your trading rules. This translates forecasts into the actual positions you
need to hold.
As I said in the introduction the components of a modern car are modular, so they can be
individually substituted for alternatives. The trading rules and other components in my
framework can also be swapped and changed.
The words module and component could imply that these are complex processes which
need thousands of lines of computer code to implement. This is not the case. Every part
involves just a few steps of basic arithmetic which require just a calculator or simple
spreadsheet.
Let’s look in more detail at the advantages of the modular approach.

Flexibility
The most obvious benefit of a modular design is flexibility. Cars really can be any colour
you like, including black. Similarly my framework can be adapted for almost any trading
rule, including the discretionary forecasts used by semi-automatic traders and the
very simple rule used by asset allocating investors. If you don’t like the position sizing
component, or any other part of the framework, you can replace it with your own.

Transparent modules

72. There are other considerations, such as the amount of leverage required versus what is available, and the
expected performance of the system. I’ll discuss these in more detail in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’.

96
                                                                          Chapter Five. Framework Overview


It’s possible to have frameworks that are nicely modular but which contain entirely opaque
black boxes. Most PCs are built like this. You can replace the hard disc or graphics card,
but you can’t easily modify them or make your own, so you are stuck with substituting
one mysterious part with another.
In contrast each component in my framework is transparent – I’ll explain how and why
it is constructed. This should give you the understanding and confidence to adapt each
module, or create your own from scratch.

Individual components with well defined interface
If you replace the gearbox in your car you need to be sure that the car will still go forward
or backwards as required. But if the drive shaft output is reversed on your new gearbox
you will end up driving into your front door when you wanted to reverse out of your
driveway. To avoid this we need to specify that the shaft on the gearbox must rotate
clockwise to make the car go forward, and vice versa.
Similarly if you use a new trading rule then the rest of the modular trading system
framework should still work correctly and give you appropriately sized positions. To do
this the individual components need to have a well defined interface – a specification
describing how they interact with other parts of the system.
For example in the framework it will be important that a trading rule forecast of say +1.5
has a consistent meaning, no matter what style of trading or instrument you are using.73

Getting the boring bit right
The part of the trading system wrapped around the trading rules, the framework, is
something that’s easily ignored. Creating it is a boring task compared with developing new
and exciting trading rules, or making your own discretionary forecasts. But it’s incredibly
important. By creating a standard framework I’ve done this dull but vital work for you.
The framework will work correctly for any trading rule that produces forecasts in a
consistent way with the right interface. So it won’t need to be radically redesigned for any
new rules. Also by using the framework asset allocating investors and semi-automatic
traders can get much of the benefits of systematic trading without using trading rules to
forecast prices.




73. It will become clear in later chapters what this consistent meaning is.

                                                                                                       97
Systematic Trading



Examples give you a starting point
Creating a new trading system from scratch is quite a daunting prospect. In the final part
of this book there are three detailed examples showing how the framework can be used to
suit asset allocating investors, semi-automatic traders and staunch systematic traders.
Together these provide a set of systems you can use as a starting point for developing your
own ideas.


The elements of the framework
Table 15 shows the components you’d have in a small trading system with two trading
rules, a total of four trading rule variations, and two instruments. You first create a
trading subsystem for each instrument. Each subsystem tries to predict the price of an
individual instrument, and calculate the appropriate position required. These subsystems
are then combined into a portfolio, which forms the final trading system.


TABLE 15: EXAMPLE OF COMPONENTS IN A TRADING SYSTEM

                                                       Instruments

 Trading rule A,     A1 forecast for
 variation 1         instrument X

                                                                                                                     Portfolio
                                                  Combined                              Subsystem                    weighted
 Trading rule A,     A2 forecast for                                                    position in X
 variation 2         instrument X                 forecast X                                                         position in X


                                       weights                  targeting    sizing
                                                                                                        weights
 Trading rule B,     B1 forecast for
 variation 1         instrument X



                                                                                                        Instrument
                                       Forecast                 Volatility   Position
 Trading rule A,     A1 forecast,
 variation 1         instrument Y


 Trading rule A,     A2 forecast for              Combined                                                           Portfolio
                                                                                        Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2         instrument Y                 forecast Y                            position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,     B1 forecast for
 variation 1         instrument Y

                                             Customising for speed and size


This trading system has two trading rules A and B; three rule variations A1, A2 and B1; and
two instruments X and Y. Dotted lines show trading subsystems for X and Y.




98
                                                              Chapter Five. Framework Overview


Instruments to trade
Instruments are the things you trade and hold positions in. They could be any financial
asset including directly held instruments such as equities and bonds, or derivatives like
options, futures, contracts for difference and spread bets. You can also trade collective
funds such as exchange traded funds (ETFs), mutual funds, and even hedge funds.

Forecasts
A forecast is an estimate of how much a particular instrument’s price will change, given a
particular trading rule variation. For example a simple equities strategy might have three
forecasts: two variations on a trend following rule, each looking for different speeds of
trend, and a separate equity value trading rule with a single variation. If you are trading
two instruments as in table 15 then there will be a total of 3 × 2 = 6 forecasts to make.
The trading rules which produce forecasts are the engine at the heart of all trading systems
used by staunch systems traders. The biggest difference between strategies will be in
which rules and variations are used, and which instruments are traded. In comparison the
rest of the framework will be fairly similar.
Semi-automatic traders make discretionary forecasts, rather than using systematic rules.
Asset allocating investors don’t try and predict asset prices and use a single fixed forecast
for all instruments.

Combined forecasts
You need a single forecast of whether an instrument will go up or down in price, and by
how much. If you have more than one forecast you will need to combine them into one
combined forecast per instrument, using a weighted average. To do this you’ll allocate
forecast weights to each trading rule variation.

Volatility targeting
It’s important to be precise about how much overall risk you want to take in your trading
system. I define this as the typical average daily loss you are willing to expose yourself
to. This volatility target is determined using your wealth, tolerance for risk, access to
leverage and expected profitability. Initially we’ll assume that you’re putting all of your
capital into a single trading subsystem, for just one instrument.

Scaled positions
You can now decide how much of the underlying asset to hold based on how risky your
instruments are, how confident you are about your forecasts, and your volatility target.
The positions you will calculate assume for now that you’re just trading one isolated
instrument, in a single trading subsystem.

                                                                                           99
At this point you’ve effectively got a complete trading system, but for a single instrument.
Just as the cells in the human body are each individual living organisms, these trading
subsystems are self-contained units, but in the next stage you’ll be putting them together.

Portfolios
To get maximum diversification you’d usually want to trade multiple instruments and put
together a portfolio of trading subsystems, each responsible for a single instrument. This
requires determining how you are going to allocate capital to the different subsystems in
your portfolio, which you will do using instrument weights. After applying this stage
you’ll end up with portfolio weighted positions in each instrument, which are then used
to calculate the trades you need to do.

Speed and Size
This isn’t a separate component in the framework, but a set of principles which apply to
the entire system. When designing trading systems it’s important to know how expensive
they are to trade, and whether you have an unusually large or small amount of capital.
Given that information, how should you then tailor your system? I’ll address both of
these issues in detail in the final chapter of part three.
Chapter Six. Instruments
                                                     Instruments

 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X

                                                                                                                   Portfolio
                                                Combined                              Subsystem                    weighted
 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for                                                    position in X
 variation 2       instrument X                 forecast X                                                         position in X


                                     weights                  targeting    sizing
                                                                                                      weights
 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X



                                                                                                      Instrument
                                     Forecast                 Volatility   Position
 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast,
 variation 1       instrument Y


 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for              Combined                                                           Portfolio
                                                                                      Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2       instrument Y                 forecast Y                            position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument Y

                                           Customising for speed and size




B   EFORE YOU THINK ABOUT HOW YOU TRADE YOU NEED TO
    consider what you’re going to trade – the actual instruments to buy or sell. It’s likely
you will know which asset classes you want to deal with, based on your knowledge and
familiarity with different markets.
However there are certain instruments that should be completely avoided for systematic
trading. Others have characteristics which make them worse than other alternatives, or
would force you to trade them in a particular way. Finally there is often a choice of how
you can access a particular market; you could get Euro Stoxx 50 European equity index
exposure by buying the individual shares, trading a future, a spread bet, a contract for
difference, a passive index fund or an active fund. Which is best?



                                                                                                                                   101
Systematic Trading



Chapter overview

 Necessities                The minimum requirements that need to be met before you can
                            trade an instrument.

 Instrument choice and      Characteristics that influence instrument choice        between
 trading style              alternatives and how to trade particular instruments.

 Access                     Different ways to get exposure to instruments, and the benefits
                            and downside of each.




Necessities
There are a few points to consider when deciding whether an instrument is suitable for
systematic trading.

Data availability
I’d like to be able to trade UK Gilt futures, but I don’t have the right data licence so I
can’t get quoted prices. You can’t trade systematically without access to prices and other
relevant data.
At a minimum you will need accurate daily price information. Fully automated strategies
that trade quickly or incorporate execution algorithms will need live tick prices.
Fundamental trading strategies require yet more kinds of data. The costs of acquiring
data on certain instruments, like Gilts perhaps, may be uneconomic for amateur investors.

Minimum sizes
Another future I would like to trade – but can’t – is the Japanese government bond (JGB)
future. The contract currently sells for around 150 million yen, which is well over a
million dollars. If I put this into my portfolio the maximum position I would want is 0.1
of a contract, which obviously isn’t possible. Few amateur investors will be able to trade
these behemoths.
In stocks the minimum size is one share, normally costing less than $1,000, although the
A class of Berkshire Hathaway shares currently sell for over $100,000. Even for cheaper
stocks, it may not be economic to trade in lots of less than 100 shares.
Minimum sizes reduce the granularity of what you can trade. Your positions become
binary – all or nothing (in the case of JGBs, always nothing). This is an important subject
and I will return to it in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’. As you’ll see in that chapter this
problem also affects the number of instruments you can hold in your portfolio.

102
                                                                         Chapter Six. Instruments


Why do prices move?
Do you know why bonds, equities and other instruments go up, or down, in price? “More
buyers than sellers” is not an acceptable answer! I personally think it’s important to have
an understanding of what makes a market function; whether it be interest rates, economic
news or corporate profits. This is vital if you’re going to design ideas first trading rules.
It’s also important to understand market dynamics once your system is running, if you
want to avoid unpleasant surprises in markets that have become dysfunctional. As I’m
redrafting this chapter, the Swiss government has just removed the peg which had held
since 2011 fixing their currency at 1.20 to the euro, resulting in a massive Swiss franc
(CHF) appreciation against all currencies. Thousands of traders including large hedge
funds and banks were on the losing side, including many who were trading systematically.
Fortunately I wasn’t trading the EUR/CHF or USD/CHF FX pairs. For me there didn’t
seem any point in trying to make systematic forecasts, since I knew the market was
controlled by central bank intervention rather than the normal historic factors driving
prices in the back-test. Keeping abreast of markets will help you to avoid similarly
dangerous instruments.

Standard deviation
There is another reason why I excluded Swiss FX positions from my systematic trading
strategies, which was the extremely low volatility of prices whilst the peg was in place.
In principle my framework can deal equally well both with assets whose returns naturally
have low standard deviations and those that are very risky. It can also cope with changes
in volatility over time.
However instruments which have extremely low risk like pegged currencies should be
excluded. Firstly, when risk returns to normal it is liable to do so very sharply, potentially
creating significant losses. Secondly, these positions need more leverage to achieve a given
amount of risk, magnifying the danger when they do inevitably blow up. Even if you
don’t use leverage they will limit the risk your overall trading system can achieve.74 Finally,
they also tend to be more costly to trade, as you will discover in chapter twelve, ‘Speed
and Size’.


Instrument choice and trading style
With your pool of available instruments narrowed by excluding those which don’t have the
necessary attributes mentioned above, you need to decide which of those remaining you
prefer to trade. These characteristics will also influence how you’ll trade the instruments
you’ve chosen.


74. I’ll return to this topic in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’.

                                                                                             103
Systematic Trading



How many instruments?
I like my portfolio of instruments to be as large and diversified as possible, as long as
I don’t run into issues with minimum sizes, for example as I would do with Japanese
government bonds. The maximum number of instruments you can have will depend on
minimum sizes, the value of your account and how much risk you’re targeting (which
you’ll learn about in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’).
In chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, you’ll see how to calculate the point at which you
could run into problems with minimum instrument size. You will then be able to work
out what size of portfolio makes sense.
Then in part four I will give some recommended portfolios in each example chapter,
which have been constructed to be as diversified as possible given the level of the volatility
target and the available instruments.

Correlation
If you already owned shares in RBS and Barclays then the last thing you would want to
add to your portfolio is another UK bank like Lloyd’s. Generally you should want to own
or trade the most diversified portfolio possible, where the average correlation between
the assets is lower than the alternatives. If there are a limited number of instruments that
you can fit in your portfolio then it makes sense to pick those with lower correlations.

Costs
Given the choice between two otherwise identical instruments you should choose the
cheapest to trade. So, if you can, use a cheap FTSE 100 future rather than an expensive
spread bet to get exposure to the UK equity index.75 Instruments that are expensive to
trade are clearly less suitable for dynamic strategies, particularly those that involve faster
trading.
Sometimes you have to trade an expensive instrument, if it’s the only way of accessing a
particular asset. In this case you should trade it more slowly. There is however a maximum
acceptable cost depending on the type of trading that you’re doing, so some instruments
will be completely unsuitable. Because the cost of trading is so important it will be covered
in great detail in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.

Liquidity
Closely related to costs is liquidity. Less liquid instruments are likely to be more expensive
to trade quickly or in larger amounts. This is more of a problem for large institutional
investors and those trading fast. Liquidity is not constant and can reduce quickly in


75. I’ll explain why the spread bet is more expensive in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.

104
                                                                      Chapter Six. Instruments


times of severe market stress, particularly for non exchange traded ‘over the counter’
instruments, as in the Credit Default Swap derivatives markets in 2008.
Again chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, will explain how those with larger account sizes
will need to understand costs and liquidity better than small investors.

Skew
Should you avoid negative skew in your portfolio from instruments like holding short
VIX (US equity volatility index) futures? Remember I covered the skew of assets and
trading rules in chapter two, ‘Systematic Trading Rules’. Static strategies will inherit the
skew of their underlying instruments, but the skew of a dynamic strategy also depends
on the style of your trading rule. So using a positive skew rule like trend following on a
negative skew asset will alleviate some of the danger.
As you will see in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’, you need to be extremely careful if
the overall returns of your trading system are expected to have negative skew. Instruments
with extreme negative skew will often have very low standard deviation for most of the
time, and should be excluded on those grounds.


Access
Finally you need to choose the route by which you access the underlying assets you’re
going to trade.

Exchange or OTC
Does your instrument trade on an exchange like shares in General Electric and Corn
futures, or over the counter (OTC) like foreign exchange (FX)? There are often different
ways of trading the same underlying asset, some via exchange, others OTC. So a spread
bet on the CHF/USD FX rate is OTC, whilst the Chicago future on the same rate is
exchange traded.
If you have a choice then, all other things being equal, should you trade on exchange or
OTC? In the January 2015 Swiss franc meltdown traders using OTC brokers suffered a
variety of difficulties, including dealers not accepting orders or displaying quotes, trades
not being honoured and fills re-marked after the fact, and in extreme cases potential
account losses as brokers went into liquidation.
Those who traded the CHF/USD future had difficulty finding deep liquidity, but
otherwise the market operated as normal. In conclusion it’s normally better to trade on
exchange if you can.




                                                                                          105
Systematic Trading



Cash or derivative
‘Cash’ is simply where you own the underlying asset directly – perhaps a share in British
Gas or a bond issued by General Electric. Alternatively you can own a derivative on
an asset, like a future, Contract for Difference or spread bet.76 The main advantage
of derivatives is that they offer straightforward leverage. Without leverage it might be
difficult to reach your volatility target, which will reduce the returns you can earn. There
may also be different tax treatments; in the UK for example spread bets are treated as
gambling, which means winnings are tax free but losses aren’t deductible.
Various types of derivatives may have different trading costs, and also have different
minimum sizes, liquidity and market access. For example a FTSE 100 future is cheaper
to trade and more liquid than the corresponding spread bet. It also has the advantage of
being accessed via an exchange, whereas the spread bet is OTC. But the future has a larger
minimum size which precludes its use by smaller investors.

Funds
Other options for trading the FTSE 100 are to buy an index tracker like an exchange
traded fund (ETF). These are collective funds – instruments which buy you a share in
a portfolio of assets. As well as ETFs, collective funds include US mutual funds, UK unit
trusts and investment trusts. Normally for systematic trading you will be interested in
passive funds like index trackers. These contain baskets of assets weighted to match an
index like the FTSE 100 or S&P 500.
Passive funds normally have relatively low annual fees and minimum sizes, but frequently
cost more than the relevant derivative to trade. But they can be useful instruments when
leverage can’t be used, or when a market can’t be accessed another way.
In some cases you might want to use active funds, where the weights to different assets
are determined by the fund manager. This might make sense if there is no relevant
passive fund or derivative, but fees are higher on active funds, and the presence of any
compensating manager skill or alpha is very hard to prove.
Collective funds can have quirks such as daily remarking, tax treatment, internal leverage
and discounts to net asset value which you should fully understand before using them.




76. I’ve deliberately excluded options and other non-linear derivatives from this list, since these can’t be used
casually as substitutes for the underlying assets.

106
                                                                         Chapter Six. Instruments


Summary of instrument choice

 Data availability        At a minimum you need daily price data to trade an instrument
                          systematically. For fundamental strategies you also need other
                          relevant data, e.g. price:earnings if you’re using an equity value
                          rule.

 Minimum sizes            For small investors large minimum trading sizes can be a problem.

 Understand what moves    Don’t trade from an ivory tower; have some idea of the factors
 returns                  driving returns. If unusual forces are at play then avoid that
                          instrument.

 Standard deviation of    Volatility must not be extremely low.
 returns

 How many instruments?    Given the size of your account and the minimum size of each
                          instrument you can determine whether you will run into problems
                          given a particular sized portfolio. You should then hold the largest
                          portfolio you can given those constraints.

 Correlation of returns   You should always try and have a portfolio where assets are as
                          diversified as possible.

 Costs                    Cheaper is better. Expensive instruments will need to be traded
                          more slowly, and may be too pricey to trade at all.

 Liquidity                For larger and less patient investors liquidity is vital.

 Skew of returns          Assets with strong negative skew need careful handling and
                          shouldn’t dominate your portfolio. Using the right trading rules
                          can improve skew to some degree.

 Trading venue            Is the market accessed via exchange, or over the counter (OTC)?
                          On exchange is preferable.

 Cash or derivative       Should you trade the asset outright, or a derivative based on its
                          value, and if so which one?

 Collective funds         Investment through collective funds can make sense when
                          derivatives can’t be used.



Now you know what you are going to trade, the next step is to think about how. So the
next chapter will cover the business of forecasting prices.




                                                                                             107
Chapter Seven. Forecasts
                                                      Instruments

 Trading rule A, A1 forecast for
 variation 1     instrument X

                                                                                                                    Portfolio
                                                Combined                               Subsystem                    weighted
 Trading rule A, A2 forecast for                                                       position in X
 variation 2     instrument X                   forecast X                                                          position in X


                                     weights                   targeting    sizing
                                                                                                       weights
 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X



                                                                                                       Instrument
                                     Forecast                  Volatility   Position
 Trading rule A, A1 forecast,
 variation 1     instrument Y


 Trading rule A, A2 forecast for                Combined                                                            Portfolio
                                                                                       Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2     instrument Y                   forecast Y                             position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument Y

                                           Customising for speed and size




W      HAT DO THESE TERMS ALL HAVE IN COMMON: BREAKOUTS,
       Elliott waves, Fibonacci waves, exponentially weighted moving average crossover
and Bollinger bands? Answer: They can all form the basis of trading rules. These rules
give you forecasts of what they think will happen to the prices of instruments you are
trading or investing in.
Staunch systems traders use multiple systematic rules like these. But rules can also be
extremely simple, like the single rule used by asset allocating investors. It’s also possible
to use my framework without any systematic rules at all, as a semi-automatic trader
making your own discretionary forecasts.




                                                                                                                                    109
Systematic Trading



Chapter overview

 What makes a good              Understand the important properties of the forecasts which
 forecast                       trading rules produce.

 Discretionary trading with     How semi-automatic traders can make forecasts that have
 stop losses                    the right characteristics.

 The asset allocating           The simplest possible trading rule used by asset allocating
 investor’s ‘no-rule’ rule      investors – a constant and identical forecast for all assets.

 Two systematic rules           A pair of suggested trading rules for staunch system traders.

 Using other people’s rules     How to adapt publicly available trading rules or invent your
                                own.

 Selecting trading rules and    A brief reminder of how I recommend selecting rules and
 variation                      variations.




What makes a good forecast

Parts of this section are quite technical; semi-automatic traders and asset
allocating investors should read it but need only skim the content. However,
staunch systems traders who will design their own trading rules need to
understand it in detail.


A forecast is a scaled quantity
When I started trading options at a large investment bank I was encouraged to put on
small proprietary positions outside of the normal customer flow trading. The idea was to
give novices some practical experience in managing risk without exposing the book to
large losses. Initially I was limited to trading single futures contracts.
Once I graduated beyond one contract I was faced with a dilemma. How big should my
position be for a purchase of German 10 year bond futures (Bunds)? Should I stick to one
contract, or increase my size? I asked for advice from a more experienced trader, Sergei.77
He sighed, exasperated at the ignorance of youth, and turned towards me.



77. Not his real name.

110
                                                                                   Chapter Seven. Forecasts


    “You need to know three things. First, how much do you like this trade? That comes
    from here,” Sergei replied, pointing to his heart.
    “Second thing, how much can you afford to lose? That is down here, in your gut,”
    and he patted his extensive stomach.
    “Last thing, how risky is it? You calculate that here.” said Sergei, tapping his forehead.
His answer was unhelpful, completely lacking in any detail, but totally correct.
It’s not enough to predict that prices are rising or falling; you also need to decide whether
they will go up a lot, or a little. You need to decide how much you like the trade. You need
a forecast – a prediction of how much prices are expected to go up or down. This chapter
is about making forecasts. I’ll return to the rest of Sergei’s wisdom in subsequent chapters.
A forecast is a number: a positive value means you want to buy the asset because the
price is expected to go up and a negative indicates you want to short the asset. Investors
who don’t use derivatives and can’t short sell will only make positive forecasts. A forecast
shouldn’t be binary – buy or sell – but should be scaled. Forecasts close to zero indicate
a small movement in prices and larger absolute values mean you expect bigger returns.
There are three reasons why scaled forecasts make sense. Firstly, if you were to examine
the returns made by a trading rule given the size of its forecasts, you’d normally find that
forecasts closer to zero aren’t as profitable as those further away. Secondly, binary systems
cost more to trade, since to go from long to short you’d need to sell twice a full size
position immediately. Finally, the rest of the framework assumes that the forecasts you get
are not binary or lumpy in other ways.78 It’s better to see forecasts changing continuously
rather than jumping around.
It’s relatively easy to design or adapt a trading rule to produce scaled forecasts, if you’re a
staunch systems trader. If you’re a semi-automatic trader generating forecasts in a more
discretionary way then you need to be able to quantify the strength of your convictions
and I’ll return to that problem later in this chapter. Asset allocating investors have it easy
since they use a fixed forecast value.

Forecasts proportional to risk adjusted return
How do you set forecasts so that they embody how much you like a position, or to be
precise how strong you think its subsequent rise or fall will be?



78. Technical notes: There are two main reasons for this. Firstly, forecasts should have well defined and
relatively stable standard deviations, otherwise the risk properties of the trading system will not be well
defined or stable. Secondly, as we’ll see subsequently I recommend limiting absolute forecast values to twice
their average. Forecast distributions which are more extreme than Gaussian normal distributions will see an
undesirable level of forecast capping. Note that there is a special case where lumpy or even binary forecasts
will work just fine. If we have a large number of relatively uncorrelated binary forecasts then once combined
these will approach a desirable Gaussian normal.

                                                                                                         111
Systematic Trading



Simple, you might think. As I was trading Bunds when I spoke to Sergei then I should set
up my trading rule so a weak forecast of 50 would mean a purchase of 50 Bund futures.
A strong forecast of 100 implies 100 contracts, and so on.
Unfortunately there are several flaws in this idea. What if you wanted to use my forecasting
rule? You might not want to take a gamble on even five Bunds, or you could work in a
large fund for whom an average position would be 50,000 contracts. This kind of forecast
doesn’t account for different account sizes or varying appetite for risk.
Secondly, what if the standard deviation of Bund prices were to double? A position of
50 contracts would now be twice as risky as you’d originally expected. The simple forecast
doesn’t account for risk changing over time.
Finally, you’d normally want to use the same trading rule across different instruments,
because it’s simpler and it allows you to pool data if you’re fitting. However 50 Bunds
expose you to much less risk than 50 Japanese government ten year bond futures, but to
much more than 50 German Schatz (two year) bond futures. The rule can’t cope with
instruments which don’t have the same risk.
The solution is to use my favourite technique, volatility standardisation. So in my
framework forecasts are proportional to expected risk adjusted returns. For example suppose
that the Bund has expected returns of 2% a year and an expected annualised standard
deviation of 8%. Schatz futures have an expected return of 1% a year, but you only expect
volatility of 2% a year. After adjusting for risk the expected return on Schatz (1% ÷ 2%
= 0.5) is twice as much as on Bunds (2% ÷ 8% = 0.25).
That implies the forecast for Schatz should be twice the forecast for Bunds. This deals with
instruments that have different risks. It also means any trading rule can be used without
modification on all instruments and that if you fit trading rules you can do so with pooled
data from multiple assets. If you continuously adjust your estimate of expected volatility
then you also cope with risk changing over time.
Finally with forecasts like these different investors can use the same trading rules, but then
scale positions depending on the size of their accounts and their appetite for risk. I show
how this is done in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’, and chapter ten, ‘Position sizing’.
You’ve seen before that the ratio of average return to standard deviation of returns is
the Sharpe ratio. So expected Sharpe ratios make good forecasts, which makes creating
trading rules very intuitive.

Forecasts should have a consistent scale
I said above that a forecast needs to be proportional to the risk adjusted return. In the
example above forecasts of 2.5 for Bunds and 5 on Schatz; 0.0000005 and 0.000001
respectively, or 5,000 and 10,000, are all valid. Which of these, or the infinity of other
options, is best?


112
                                                                             Chapter Seven. Forecasts


In truth it doesn’t really matter, as long as you are consistent, but whichever scaling you
choose here will affect the rest of your trading system. In particular the expected average
absolute value of your forecasts is a key part of specifying the system. Life will be easier
if you choose a scaling that is easy to work with. Very small or large numbers are difficult
for humans to cope with and even computers struggle with floating point representation
of tiny fractions.
My recommendation is to create forecasts which have an expected absolute value of 10.
So +10 is an average buy and -10 an average sell. A forecast of +5 would be a weak buy,
and -20 is a very strong sell. These forecast numbers may seem very abstract right now.
Don’t be too concerned as in chapter ten ‘Position Sizing’ I will show you how to translate
them into actual positions.
If you’re a semi-automatic trader using discretionary forecasts, it’s straightforward
to have the right scaling, as I will show you below. The rule used by asset allocating
investors also has the appropriate scale. The example rules I provide for staunch systems
traders later in the chapter are also correctly scaled. But if you’re making your own rules,
or adapting others, you will need to standardise their natural scaling, as I’ll explain later
in the chapter.

Should we allow forecasts to be as large as possible?
With an expected absolute value of 10, a forecast of +10 is bullish, and one of +20 is
really bullish. What if you’re confident that this is the chance of a lifetime, like the 2009
Barclays trade which I told you about in the introduction. Should you allow your rule to
have a forecast of +100? I think not. Forecasts should be capped at a maximum absolute
value and I recommend a limit of 20. Here’s why:


 Risk control        Diversification is the investor’s best friend. But it’s pointless diversifying
                     if you then allow one part of your system to dominate your returns. You
                     need to limit the risk that any trading rule variation can contribute to the
                     overall system.

 Limited data        When I back-test a profitable trading rule I normally find that positive
                     forecasts are associated with price rises, and larger values mean larger
                     rises. However for a properly scaled rule very large forecast values will
                     appear rarely in a back-test. So there is a lot of uncertainty around
                     whether extremely large forecasts translate into proportionally larger
                     price movements, as I don’t usually have enough data to support this
                     finding.
                     If a forecast had a Gaussian normal distribution you’d only see absolute
                     forecast values over 20 around 5% of the time, so there is only limited
                     evidence that forecasts of this magnitude are actually correct.




                                                                                                 113
Systematic Trading



 Extremes are        Normally markets trend with falls followed by further falls, but after very
 often different     sharp drops subsequent one day rises are more likely; the so called ‘dead
                     cat bounce’. Similarly high yielding stocks do well, but those with dividend
                     yields above 50% are probably going bankrupt, or at the very least about
                     to cut their dividend. Many other patterns also reverse at extremes. These
                     effects are not often strong or common enough to exploit directly, but
                     they should give you concern about betting too much when you have very
                     strong forecasts.

 Higher realised     A high forecast could mean that you expect large returns, but equally
 return volatility   might be due to very low standard deviation of returns. Unfortunately
                     periods of subdued volatility are usually followed by jumps to much
                     higher levels, often combined with reversals in price.
                     I had very strong positive forecasts in the Japanese Bond markets in
                     January 2013, mainly due to relatively low volatility. When Prime Minister
                     Abe unveiled his latest set of economic reforms volatility spiked rapidly as
                     prices dropped fast. Fortunately because my forecasts were capped the
                     damage was contained.

 Limited             If forecasts have a Gaussian normal distribution then it’s rare, again around
 downside            5% of the time, that you’ll see values bigger than 20. So the reduction in
                     your returns from capping is quite small compared to the potential risk
                     control benefits.




Staunch systems traders shouldn’t ignore forecasts that are outside of the range -20 to
+20, but cap them. A forecast of +25 from your trading rule should be reduced to +20.
Increase any forecast lower than -20 to that level. All your forecasts will then be in the
range -20 to +20.
For semi-automatic traders all your discretionary forecasts should be in the range of -20
to +20, with no exceptions, even for the trade of a lifetime. Asset allocating investors
don’t need to worry as you will have a fixed forecast of +10.
If we can’t short an instrument, because of limited access to derivatives or difficulties
selling short, then you’ll also need to change all negative forecasts to zero.


Discretionary trading with stop losses

Semi-automatic Trader

If you’re a semi-automatic trader then you won’t use systematic trading rules but instead
make discretionary forecasts either on gut feeling, or using complex analysis which can’t
be systematised, like my 2009 Barclays trade in the introduction.

114
                                                                        Chapter Seven. Forecasts


As well as the sign of the forecast, positive for long and negative for short, you must
indicate how strongly you feel about it. Your forecasts must be correctly scaled: the expected
absolute value should be around 10, and they must be between the recommended limits
of -20 and +20.
Forecasts don’t have to be finely quantified, such as “I love the Nikkei today, about
8.7663.” However, you should be able to give a rough indication of the strength of your
passion for the Nikkei. You can then translate your opinion into a forecast number, as
table 16 shows.


TABLE 16: TRANSLATING OPINIONS INTO A QUANTIFIED FORECAST


   Very      Strong      Sell    Weak     Neutral    Weak      Buy     Strong        Very
  strong      Sell                sell               buy                buy         strong
    sell                                                                             buy

   -20         -15       -10       -5        0          5       10       15           20




If you can’t go short assets, because you’re not using derivatives like spread bets or can’t
short sell in your account, then you’ll need to limit yourself to positive forecast values.
You shouldn’t change your forecast once a bet is open. Otherwise there is the risk of
meddling, taking profits too early by reducing the conviction of your forecast or doubling
up on a loss. Instead you will be using a systematic trailing stop loss rule to close all your
positions. I’ll explain this further in chapter thirteen, where I describe a semi-automatic
trading system in more detail.
There are substantial advantages to using discretionary forecasts in my systematic
framework with stop losses; you can make predictions about the behaviour of your live
trading and measure expected risk more precisely. Your positions will always be the correct
size for a given forecast, tolerance for risk, and account size. This will give you more
time and energy to get the forecast right. Finally, by using stop losses you’ll be trading
somewhat like an ‘early loss taking’ trend follower, so it’s more likely your strategy will
have benign positive skew.




                                                                                             115
Systematic Trading



The asset allocating investor’s ‘no-rule’ rule

Asset Allocating Investor

Think about a static portfolio of two collective funds: an S&P 500 equity and a US
benchmark bond fund. Suppose you bought them in equal weights, with half your cash in
each. As bond funds tend to have a quarter of the volatility of equities this portfolio will
have 80% of its risk coming from stocks. As I explained in chapter two the solution is to
hold the two assets in risk parity, each contributing the same amount of expected risk.
This implies a cash weight to equities of roughly 20% and 80% to bonds.
By using the framework, instruments will automatically have identical expected
standard deviation of returns for a given forecast level. This means if you have an equally
weighted portfolio of two trading subsystems, one for equities and one for bonds, each
with identical forecasts for their individual instrument, then you’d always have the same
expected volatility for both equities and bonds. You’d effectively have a risk parity strategy
where risk was being constantly adjusted, or what I described in chapter two as a ‘fourth
degree’ static portfolio (page 38).
Hence the correct rule for an asset allocating investor is to have a constant forecast
equal to the expected average forecast, +10 for all instruments at all times. I call this the
‘no-rule’ rule. You don’t think you can predict how different assets will perform, so you
buy them all. Remember all forecasts are proportional to return adjusted for standard
deviation. So using an equal forecast for all instruments is equivalent to assuming all
assets have the same expected Sharpe ratio.
There are certain advantages to using this constant forecast approach within the systematic
framework, rather than just buying a normal risk parity portfolio. For starters you can
probably do better than equal weights, as you will remember from chapter four, ‘Portfolio
allocation’. Secondly, many risk parity funds don’t adjust for the standard deviation of
returns changing over time, whereas you will.79 As I’ll discuss in chapter twelve, ‘Speed
and Size’, that adjustment will be done after carefully considering the trading costs of our
instruments. A DIY risk parity portfolio avoids paying the management fees you’d have
with an external fund manager.
Finally, if you do decide to introduce expectations of asset returns there is a neat and
relatively robust way to do this, by adjusting handcrafted portfolio weights in line with
where you think prices will go. I’ll give you more detail in the asset allocating investor
example in part four of the book.


79. As you might recall from chapter two, page 38, many risk parity portfolios are ‘third degree’ with
allocations set with initial expected risk, rather than the ‘fourth degree’ you will have (allocations adjusted as
risk changes).

116
                                                                                   Chapter Seven. Forecasts


Two example systematic rules

Staunch Systems Trader
Semi-automatic traders and asset allocating investors can skip the remainder of
this chapter, which is for staunch systems traders only.

The two examples of trading rules above aren’t very interesting. I include them to show
how my framework can still be used by people who don’t believe that market returns can
be forecasted, or others who think they can do it better than a simple rule can. However
staunch systematic traders disagree with both of these groups and wish to forecast prices
with fully systematic trading rules.
There isn’t enough space in this book to include every trading rule in existence. Fortunately,
there’s a plethora of other books and websites available which contain explicit trading
rules, or ideas from which they can be developed. Just one book, Perry Kaufman’s Trading
Systems and Methods has over 1000 pages and includes dozens of rules.80 The next section
in this chapter will show how you can create your own trading rules, or modify other
people’s.
In this section I will briefly outline two rules that I use in my own trading system.81 If you
want to use them you can find more detail in appendix B. In part four of this book I’ll
show how these rules can be incorporated into the framework to create a complete system
for the staunch systems trader.

Trend following with the EWMAC rule
Many asset prices seem to show momentum: what goes up, usually carries on going up;
and vice versa. This effect can be captured by using trend following rules. I am a big fan
of these types of rules for several reasons.
Firstly, they work. As we saw in chapter one, the trend following ‘early loss taker’ rule made
mincemeat of its opposition, the ‘early profit taker’. There’s a lot of academic research and
real performance statistics supporting the use of trend following rules. Secondly, I like
rules which I can explain; as I said in chapter two prospect theory justifies why these
rules work, and should continue to do so. Also, trend following is an easy to implement
technical strategy using only price data. Finally, it has benign positive skew.




80. There is a brief selection including this and other books in appendix A.
81. Although these two rules represent only part of my trading system these two rules alone would account
for around 85% of back-tested performance. Unfortunately I’m unable to give a full description of every rule
I use, partly because of space and also due to legal constraints.

                                                                                                        117
Systematic Trading



Of course you could use the now familiar early loss taker rule for trend following, but
there are better alternatives.82 One of the most popular trading rules for capturing trends
goes by the unwieldy name of Exponentially Weighted Moving Average Crossover, or
EWMAC for short.83 Fortunately the idea is simpler to implement than it is to say. You
take two exponentially weighted moving averages (EWMA) of an asset’s price. One
average, the slower, looks back over a longer period than the faster average. When the
faster is above the slower it means that prices are in an uptrend and you should buy; and
vice versa.


FIGURE 18: RIDING THE DOWNTREND IN CRUDE OIL FUTURES WITH THE EWMAC TREND
FOLLOWING RULE. WE SELL WHEN THE FAST EWMA CROSSES THE SLOW; AND BUY WHEN
THIS REVERSES




Figure 18 shows an example. Here we’ve got the price of crude oil futures from summer
2008 onwards. After a long uptrend in prices there is a reversal in July 2008. Within a
few weeks the fast EWMA has gone below the slower and goes short. The gap gets bigger
and the position is increased until January. A gentle bullish trend begins and the short


82. Early loss taker has some unpleasant attributes. First of all it gives a binary forecast; you are either long or
short. Secondly, your current forecast depends on prices but also what positions you have recently had. This
isn’t a very nice property; amongst other things it means your precise back-tested behaviour will depend on
where your price history began.
83. This is probably one of the oldest purely systematic trading rules in current use; ignoring the older, more
subjective, technical analysis pattern matching tradition. There are academic studies of EWMAC dating back
to the 1960s and it would have been used by traders prior to that.

118
                                                                                      Chapter Seven. Forecasts


is reduced, and then reversed once the fast EWMA climbs back above the slow in June
2009. There is a detailed specification of the EWMAC rule in appendix B.

The carry rule
EWMAC is a positive skew rule which needs prices to trend in one direction or another.
To balance it out here is the carry rule which benefits when nothing happens. Foreign
exchange carry is a well known strategy for exploiting stable markets; if you borrow in
Japanese yen at 0.5% and invest the money in Australian dollars at 3.5% then you’ll earn
3%, assuming that the JPY/AUD exchange rate doesn’t budge. But what does carry mean
for other assets?84
Carry, which is sometimes called roll down or contango, is the return that you will get
if asset prices are perfectly stable. If the world doesn’t change this will be equal to the
yield on the asset, less the cost of borrowing (or the interest you would have got from
holding cash). So if you buy shares in French supermarket Carrefour which currently has
a dividend yield of 3%, and you pay 1% to borrow the purchase cost, then you earn 2%
carry on the position if the share price is unchanged.
Similarly today I can buy June 2018 Eurodollar futures at 97.94, or March 2018 at 98.01.
If there is no change in the shape of the yield curve then in three months’ time June
futures will rise to 98.01, earning 0.07 per contract.
Academic theory predicts that prices should move against us to offset these returns,
but it often doesn’t. Carry is usually earned steadily on these kinds of trades although
occasionally they go horribly wrong and the relationship temporarily breaks down, giving
this trading rule some evil negative skew. I think the rule is profitable as a reward for
taking on this nasty skew and various other kinds of risk premium which tend to be
correlated to carry trades.
Full details on how I calculate carry are given in appendix B, from page 285 onwards.
There is an example of the carry trading rule in action in figure 19, again showing crude
oil futures during the great crash of 2008. The price of the nearer futures contract dips
below the contract we are trading in mid-August. This is a bearish carry signal and the
rule sells to enjoy some of the continuing fall in price.




84. The first multi asset (rather than FX specific) academic research into carry appears to be the imaginatively
titled working paper ‘Carry’ by Ralph Koijen, Tobias Moskowitz, Lasse Pedersen and Evert Vrugt from 2012.
The specification of the carry rule here is identical to that paper. But rules like this have been used in the
industry for much longer.

                                                                                                            119
Systematic Trading



FIGURE 19: TRADING CRUDE OIL WITH CARRY IN 2008-10. WE ARE SLOW TO SELL AND STAY
SHORT TOO LONG




Unfortunately it remains bearish long after the market has turned, but you can’t win
them all. It makes sense to combine diversifying trading rules like the positive skew, trend
following EWMAC rule, with a negative skew carry rule.


Adapting and creating trading rules

Staunch Systems Trader

The above trading rules, one positive and one negative skew, are sufficient to create a
pretty good trading strategy. The benefits of adding further rules within the same styles
are relatively limited. Just using these two simple rules would generate roughly 85% of
the back-tested performance of my own more complicated system.
However you might still want to create your own rules, or adapt those you find elsewhere.
Here are some pointers, with an example of how I modified a trading rule I read about
whilst researching this chapter, which I’ve nicknamed ‘Close to Open’.




120
                                                                                     Chapter Seven. Forecasts



  Simplicity and        Trading rules in books tend to be quite complicated, with lots of
  objectivity           conditionals and a degree of subjectivity. Try and pare the rule down to its
                        essential elements, to create a simple and objective trading rule.
                        The example rule I found could be reduced to ‘Buy if the open is higher
                        than yesterday’s close’. (I haven’t tested this rule and I have no idea if it
                        will work or not.)

  Continuous,           Many trading rules are unfortunately of a buy or sell, binary, nature. If
  not binary            possible you should make them continuous. I converted the simple rule
                        above to calculate the raw forecast as [Open price - Close price].

  Not market            The value of a forecast should be comparable across markets and across
  specific;             time. If a forecast is in price units, as in the simple example here, then you
  volatility            should volatility standardise it to get a forecast proportional to Sharpe
  standardised          ratio. So your forecast would be:
                        [Open price - Close price ] ÷ (Recent standard deviation of daily returns)
                        This is the same standardisation that I use in the EWMAC and Carry rules.

  Changing              Separate entry and exit rules are not suitable for the framework.* Ideally a
  forecast              forecast should change continuously, independently of what our position
                        is, throughout the life of a trade.
                        This suggests that you should create rules which recalculate forecasts
                        every time you have new data, and then adjust your positions accordingly.
                        Normally this is simply a matter of modifying the entry rule. Rather than
                        use the ‘Close to Open’ rule only for entries, you would calculate the
                        forecast value every day.

  Correct scaling       If you’re going to create trading rules you need to rescale them from
                        their natural scaling, so that the expected absolute value of the forecast
                        is around 10. You do this by multiplying your raw forecast by a forecast
                        scalar. You need to back-test the behaviour of the rule with real data to
                        find the average forecast, but in line with my recommendations in chapter
                        three, ‘Fitting’, you shouldn’t look at performance data whilst doing this.
                        See appendix D, page 297, for more details.
                        The natural average absolute value of this rule is 0.33, implying the forecast
                        scalar in this case is 10 ÷ 0.33 = 30.



* If you absolutely have to use an entry rule which doesn’t adjust throughout the life of the trade, with a
separate exit rule, then I strongly suggest you use the stop loss rule I advocate for semi-automatic traders. I
don’t recommend using any other kind of explicit exit rule as they are usually over-fitted and make life very
complicated.




                                                                                                           121
Systematic Trading



Selecting trading rules and variations

Staunch Systems Trader

Even if you don’t adapt or create new rules and just use mine, there are still a theoretically
infinite number of EWMAC trading rule variations on the menu. If you do get creative
and make your own rules the number of options will explode. Which rules and variations
should you use in practice?
As I said in chapter three, ‘Fitting’, I don’t recommend using back-tested profitability
to select trading rules or variations. Instead you should focus on behaviour such as the
correlation between variations, and the speed they trade at, whilst ignoring Sharpe ratio
and other performance metrics.
You should then use two selection criteria. The first is to avoid including any two variations
with more than a 95% correlation to each other, as one of them will not be adding any
value to the system. I discuss how to prune possible variations of the EWMAC rule in
appendix B (in the section on EWMAC, from page 282).
Secondly, you must exclude anything which trades too slowly, or too quickly. As I
mentioned in chapter two, very slow rules are unlikely to generate significant Sharpe
ratio.85 I suggest you remove any rule which holds positions for longer than a few months.
At the other end of the spectrum for many instruments fast rules will be too expensive
to trade. This could mean you end up choosing a different set of variations for each
instrument. I’ll return to this in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, where I’ll show how to
determine which variations should be excluded for a given level of trading costs.
The staunch systems trader example chapter in part four will give an overview of the rule
selection process.


Summary of trading rules and forecasts

  Where do                  If you’re staunch systems traders then each of your trading rules
  forecasts come            produces a forecast, including any variations that we’re using; for
  from                      example to capture different trend lengths.
                            Asset allocating investors use a constant identical forecast for all
                            instruments.
                            Semi-automatic traders make discretionary forecasts on an ad-hoc
                            basis for a changing set of instruments.



85. This also means we can’t prove that they work statistically.

122
                                                                          Chapter Seven. Forecasts



 Forecast for every   For staunch systems traders each instrument will have a separate
 instrument and       forecast for a given trading rule variation. So if you had ten instruments
 from each trading    and three different kinds of trading rule, each with two variations, then
 rule                 you’d calculate 10 × 3 × 2 = 60 individual forecasts.
                      Semi-automatic traders and asset allocating investors have one
                      forecast per instrument.

 Forecast sign is     Positive means you buy and go long the asset. A negative forecast
 vital                means you go short. A zero forecast means you shouldn’t have a
                      position.

 Forecast size is     Absolutely larger forecasts mean you are more confident of your
 also important       opinion and expect a bigger rise (or fall) in prices.
                      Forecasts should have an expected absolute value of 10.

 Forecasts            Forecasts must lie in the range -20 to +20, unless you can’t short an
 shouldn’t be too     instrument in which case it would be between 0 and +20. If a trading
 big                  rule produces a larger forecast then cap it at either end of the range.

 Semi-automatic       Make your own predictions and convert them into forecasts between
 traders:             -20 (strongly bearish) and +20 (strongly bullish). Positions are closed
                      using systematic stop loss rule, as described in chapter thirteen.

 Asset allocating     Use a constant forecast of +10 for all assets.
 investors:

 Staunch              Use a combination of systematic trading rules like EWMAC and Carry,
 systematic           design your own rule or adapt others. Follow the advice earlier in this
 traders:             chapter, and in chapter three, when selecting trading rule variations.




You should now have one, or more, trading rules ready to go. Asset allocating investors
will be using the single ‘no rule’ rule, and semi-automatic traders will be making
discretionary forecasts. If you’re in either of these groups you can skip to chapter nine.
Semi-automatic traders should either have developed their own rules, adapted a
publically available rule, or be happy for now to use one or both of the rules I provided
earlier in the chapter. If you have only one trading rule variation you can also skip the
next chapter. But if you’re using multiple rules or variations then you’ll need to read
chapter eight to discover how to combine forecasts from different rules.




                                                                                              123
Chapter Eight. Combined Forecasts
                                                     Instruments

 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X

                                                                                                                   Portfolio
 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for              Combined                              Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2       instrument X                 forecast X                            position in X                position in X


                                     weights                  targeting    sizing
                                                                                                      weights
 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X



                                                              Volatility                              Instrument
                                                                           Position
 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast,

                                     Forecast
 variation 1       instrument Y


 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for              Combined                                                           Portfolio
                                                                                      Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2       instrument Y                 forecast Y                            position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument Y

                                          Customising for speed and size




Staunch Systems Trader
This chapter is about combining forecasts from different trading rules, including
variations of the same rule, so it’s required reading for most staunch systems
traders. If you’re an asset allocating investor using the single ‘no rule’ rule or a
semi-automatic trader you can skip ahead to chapter nine.


L   IFE IS SIMPLE WHEN YOU HAVE ONLY ONE TRADING RULE. STRONG
    positive forecast? Then buy. Negative? Sell. But what if you have multiple rules and
they disagree?


                                                                                                                                   125
Systematic Trading



As you saw in the previous chapter, in late 2009 and 2010 one of my trading rules (the
EWMAC trend following rule) had turned bullish on crude oil, but another (Carry)
was still bearish (see figures 18 and 19). What should I have done – buy, sell, or do
nothing? Multiple forecasts which disagree aren’t conclusive – you need to create a single
combined forecast for every instrument.


Chapter overview

  Combining with forecast             How to use forecast weights to produce a single combined
  weights                             forecast for each instrument.

  Choosing the forecast               Using the handcrafting method to find weights for each trading
  weights                             rule.

  Getting the correct                 Making sure the combined forecast has the right expected
  variation                           absolute value by correcting for diversification across the
                                      individual forecasts.

  Capping combined                    Just like the forecast from each trading rule you should limit
  forecasts                           the size of your combined forecasts.




Combining with forecast weights
How do you go from two or more forecasts, to a single combined forecast for each
instrument? In the framework you need to use a weighted average of your forecasts, where
the weights are forecast weights. These are a type of portfolio weight, where your portfolio
consists of trading rule variations, and they should all be positive and add up to 100%.
So if you were trading crude oil in mid-2009, as shown in figures 18 and 19, then you
might have had forecasts of +15 in the EWMAC trend following variation and -10 in
Carry. With forecast weights of 50% in each rule your combined forecast would be 2.5.86


Choosing the forecast weights
How do you find the best weights to use when combining forecasts? This is an example
of the problem of allocating a portfolio of assets, which we discussed in chapter four. But
now the asset weights you have to choose are forecast weights for trading rules and their
variations, rather than long positions in equities or bonds.


86. (0.5 × 15) + (0.5 × -10) = 2.5.

126
                                                                     Chapter Eight. Combined Forecasts


Forecast weights might be the same for all instruments, or different. I’ll now show you
how to use the handcrafting method I described in chapter four to find those weights,
although you can also use bootstrapping if you’re comfortable with that.87 To find
handcrafted weights you need both correlations and a way of grouping your assets.
You can back-test the performance of different trading rules to get historical estimates for
correlations. Alternatively tables 56 and 57 in appendix C (from page 294) give some
typical values for trading rules within the same instrument.
Once you have correlations the next step in the handcrafted method is to group your
assets. The simplest way is to group the variations within a particular trading rule, then
allocate across trading rules. Let’s take a simple example. Suppose we’re using the two
rules from the last chapter, trend following (EWMAC) and Carry. For now assume
that EWMAC has three variants, with fast look-backs of 16, 32 and 64 for the moving
averages.88 The carry rule has a single variation. Here is how I calculated the weights.


 First level            • Group one (EWMAC): From table 57 in appendix C (page 295) I get
 grouping                 the correlations between EWMAC variations: 0.90 between adjacent
 Within trading           variations, and 0.7 between the variations with fast look-backs 16 and
 rules                    64. Using table 8 (page 79) row 11 I get weights of 16% in look-back
                          32, and 42% in look-backs 16 and 64.
                        • Group two (Carry): One asset. Using table 8 row 1: 100% in Carry.

 Second level           Using table 8 row 2: 50% in the EWMAC and 50% in Carry.
 grouping
 Across trading
 rules




This gives us the weights in table 17. By the way it’s also possible to have a three level
grouping, if you are mixing rules of different styles.




87. Naturally this should be done on an out of sample basis, so your weights change during the back-test.
After cost performance must be used when generating portfolio weights. I discuss costs more in chapter
twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.
88. The slow look-back is 4 times the fast, as discussed in appendix B, page 284.

                                                                                                     127
Systematic Trading



TABLE 17: EXAMPLE HANDCRAFTED FORECAST WEIGHTS


                          1st        2nd        Final
                         level      level      weights

 EWMAC 16, 64            42%        50%          21%

 EWMAC 32, 128            16%       50%          8%

 EWMAC 64, 256           42%        50%          21%

 Carry                   100%       50%         50%




Notice that I haven’t shown you how to incorporate different performance between rules,
the effect of costs, or how to decide if different instruments should have different weights.
If you’ve followed my advice from chapter three, and not fitted or selected trading rules
based on Sharpe ratio, then you risk having some poor rules in your portfolio, on which
you could want to reduce the allocation. It’s also quite likely faster rules will have worse
after-cost performance than slower ones.
I’ll discuss these issues in detail in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’. There will also be
a more realistic example using performance and cost estimates in the staunch systems
trader example chapter in part four.


Getting to 10
I recommended in chapter six that all your individual forecasts should have the same
expected variability – equivalent to an expected absolute value of 10. But unless your
trading rules are perfectly correlated it’s likely that the combined forecast will end up
on a smaller scale. It’s the same general effect you get from putting less than perfectly
correlated assets into any portfolio, where the overall portfolio will always end up with
lower risk than its constituents. The magnitude of the fall in standard deviation will
depend on the degree of diversification.
However the trading system framework will not work consistently if combined forecasts
have a low and unpredictable scaling. You need your combined forecasts to maintain the
same expected absolute value of 10 as you required for individual forecasts. To fix this the
combined forecast is multiplied by a forecast diversification multiplier.




128
                                                                           Chapter Eight. Combined Forecasts


    CONCEPT: DIVERSIFICATION MULTIPLIER
    If you have two stocks, each with identical return volatility of 10%, with half your
    money in each, what will be the volatility of the whole portfolio? Naturally it will
    depend on how correlated the two assets are.
    If they are perfectly correlated then the portfolio will have a return standard
    deviation of 10%; the same as the individual assets. But if the correlation between
    the two assets was 0.5, the portfolio volatility would come out at 8.66%.89 Similarly
    a correlation of zero gives a volatility of 7.07%. More diversified portfolios have
    lower volatility.
    In the framework we are concerned with putting together volatility standardised
    assets that have the same expected average standard deviation of returns; and to
    do this we need forecasts to have the same average absolute value. To ensure this is
    always the case you need to multiply the forecasts or positions you have to account
    for portfolio diversification, so that your total portfolio also achieves the standard
    volatility target.
    This multiplication factor is the diversification multiplier.90 If the correlation
    between the two assets in the simple two stocks example is 1.0, then because the
    portfolio has the same volatility as its members (10%) no adjustment is required,
    and the multiplier will be 1. A correlation of 0.5 implies a multiplier equal to the
    target volatility of 10%, divided by the natural portfolio volatility of 8.66%. This
    will be 10 ÷ 8.66 = 1.15. Finally if the two assets were completely uncorrelated
    with portfolio volatility of 7.07%, then the multiplier would be 10 ÷ 7.07 = 1.44.
    You will get even higher values with negative correlations. However this will result
    in dangerously large multipliers, so I strongly recommend you floor any estimated
    correlations at zero.
    You can use two possible sources for correlations to do this calculation. Correlations
    can be estimated with data from back-tests, or using rule of thumb values from the
    tables in appendix C.91
    You can do the actual calculation with the precise equation, or alternatively table
    18 gives a rule of thumb which will give a good approximation.92

89. You can replicate this result with one of the many online portfolio calculators, such as www.zenwealth.
com/businessfinanceonline/RR/PortfolioCalculator.html
90. The diversification multiplier is also a measure of the number of independent bets in the portfolio, as
used in the law of active management.
91. A couple of technical points. Firstly strictly speaking diversification multipliers should be calculated on a
rolling out of sample basis if based on back-tested data. However as you’re not optimising a parameter based
on profitability, estimating these single multipliers won’t cause serious problems with over-fitting. Secondly
when estimating forecast diversification multipliers you can either use the forecasts from each individual
instrument, or pool back-tests of different instruments (which is my preferred approach), before calculating
correlation matrices.
92. The precise formula and spreadsheet method is in appendix D (page 297).

                                                                                                             129
Systematic Trading



      FIGURE 20: COMBINING DIFFERENT FORECASTS REDUCES VARIABILITY. RESCALING
      FIXES THIS




      Figure 20 shows this effect for two uncorrelated forecasts A and B, which I’ve
      combined with a 50% weight to each. They cover the range from -20 to +20. But
      the combined forecast is much less variable than I want, with a smaller range
      of -15 to +12. Scaling the combined forecast up with a forecast diversification
      multiplier fixes the problem.




130
                                                                       Chapter Eight. Combined Forecasts


TABLE 18: MORE ASSETS AND LOWER CORRELATIONS MEAN MORE DIVERSIFICATION AND A
HIGHER MULTIPLIER93

                                       Diversification multiplier

                                Average correlation between assets
     Number of
       assets            0.0        0.25          0.5         0.75         1.0

          2              1.41        1.27         1.15         1.10         1.0

          3              1.73        1.41         1.22         1.12         1.0

          4              2.0         1.51         1.27         1.10         1.0

          5              2.2         1.58         1.29         1.15         1.0

         10              3.2         1.75         1.35         1.17         1.0

          15             3.9         1.83         1.37         1.17         1.0

         20              4.5         1.86         1.38         1.18         1.0

    50 or more            7.1        1.94         1.40         1.19         1.0


The table shows the approximate diversification multiplier given the number of assets in
a portfolio (rows) and the average correlation between them (columns). Beware of using
very high multipliers.


I’ll now explain how to calculate the forecast diversification multiplier. If you don’t
have back-tested forecast values then you can estimate likely correlations from tables 56
and 57 in appendix C (from page 294). Correlation between selected variations of the
same rule tends to be high; up to 0.9 but averaging around 0.7. Across different trading
rules within the same style it is around 0.5. Using different styles of rules, correlations for
trading rules within an instrument are around 0.25.
For the simple example with four rule variations from earlier in the chapter I populated
a correlation matrix using the information in appendix C, which is shown in table 19.




93. These values assume that you have equal weights in your portfolio and all correlations are identical. So
they are an approximation, but very close to the real answer except for extreme portfolios.

                                                                                                        131
Systematic Trading



TABLE 19: CORRELATION OF TRADING RULE FORECASTS IN SIMPLE EXAMPLE

                          EW16       EW32        EW64        Carry

 EWMAC 16,64                1

 EWMAC 32,128              0.9          1

 EWMAC 64,256              0.6         0.9          1

 Carry                    0.25        0.25        0.25         1


Values shown are correlations, populated using values in appendix C tables.


You could now use tables 18 and 19 to find an approximate forecast diversification
multiplier for the four rule variations. The matrix in table 19 has a rounded average
correlation of 0.50,94 which with four assets in table 18 gives a multiplier of 1.27. As a
comparison the precise value is 1.31 using the actual forecast weights calculated above
and the formula on page 297.
Finally, a word of warning. It’s possible, as table 18 shows us, to get very high multipliers
if your trading rules are sufficiently diversified, even if you cap negative correlations at
zero. As you’ll see in a moment I recommend that combined forecasts are limited to a
maximum value of 20, so having a high multiplier would mean having capped forecasts
most of the time, and effectively behaving as if you had a binary trading rule which is
either fully long or fully short.
To avoid this I advocate using a maximum diversification multiplier of 2.5, regardless of
what your actual estimate is.


Capped at 20
In the previous chapter I recommended that you limit the forecast from individual rules
to the range -20 to +20. However it’s possible in theory for a combined forecast to go
above 20 if the forecast diversification multiplier is greater than 1, as is usually the
case. To take a simple example, if the Carry rule and a single EWMAC variation both
had forecasts of +16, with forecast weights of 50% on each rule, and a diversification
multiplier of 1.5, then the combined forecast would be 24.95




94. You shouldn’t include the self correlation ‘1’ values when working out the average.
95. The weighted average of the two forecasts is (16.0 × 50%) + (16.0 × 50%) = 16.0. After applying the
multiplier the combined forecast is 16.0 × 1.5 = 24.

132
                                                                  Chapter Eight. Combined Forecasts


All the reasons cited in the previous chapter for limiting individual forecasts apply equally
to combined forecasts, so I strongly encourage you to limit combined forecasts to absolute
values of 20 or less. Any value outside this range should be capped.


Summary for combining forecasts

 Instrument         You start with the forecasts for each trading rule variation for an instrument.
 forecasts for      So if you have two rules, each with three variations, then you’d have six
 each trading       possible forecast values per instrument.
 rule and
                    I recommended in the previous chapter that each individual forecast has
 variation
                    an expected average absolute value of around 10 and should be limited to
                    between -20 and +20.

 Forecast           Each rule variation should have a positive forecast weight. The weights
 weights            must add up to 100%. These weights can be the same across instruments,
                    or different.

 Raw combined       Using the forecast weights, take a weighted average of the forecasts from
 forecast           each rule variation.

 Forecast           This is needed to get the expected absolute value of the combined forecast
 diversification    up to the recommended value of 10.
 multiplier
                    Estimated correlations are needed; from back-test results, or the rule
                    of thumb tables in appendix C. You can then calculate the multiplier
                    approximately from table 18 or precisely using the equation on page 297.
                    The multiplier is at least 1.0 and I recommend a maximum of 2.5.

 Rescaled           This is the raw combined forecast multiplied by the forecast diversification
 combined           multiplier.
 forecast
                    Because of the diversification multiplier it will have an expected average
                    absolute value equal to the expected variability of the individual forecasts,
                    which I recommend to be 10.

 Final combined     I recommend you cap the rescaled combined forecasts within the range
 forecast           -20 to +20, as for individual forecasts.




Now you can forecast price movements for a particular instrument you are ready to
translate that into actual trades. The first step in doing this is to decide how much money
you are willing to put at risk, as you’ll see in the next chapter.




                                                                                                 133
Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting
                                                      Instruments

 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X

                                                                                                                              Portfolio
                                                Combined                                         Subsystem                    weighted
 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for                                                               position in X
 variation 2       instrument X                 forecast X                                                                    position in X




                                                               Volatility targeting
                                                                                                                 weights
                                     weights                                          sizing
 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X



                                                                                                                 Instrument
                                                                                      Position
 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast,

                                     Forecast
 variation 1       instrument Y


 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for              Combined                                                                      Portfolio
                                                                                                 Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2       instrument Y                 forecast Y                                       position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument Y

                                          Customising for speed and size




D     O YOU REMEMBER SERGEI, DISPENSER OF OPAQUE TRADING
      advice in chapter seven? He told me that there were three issues to consider when
deciding how big a position we should have. The first thing to consider was how much
we liked the trade. You’ve dealt with that by creating a single forecast for each instrument
you’re trading – either a discretionary forecast for semi-automated traders, a constant
forecast for asset allocating investors, or a combined forecast for staunch systems
traders. Now we’re ready to return to Sergei’s second question, “How much can you
afford to lose?”96


96. Many trading books use the term ‘money management’ to cover both volatility targeting and position
sizing (which is discussed in the next chapter), but I prefer to separate them out for the reasons I explained
in chapter five, ‘Framework Overview’.

                                                                                                                                              135
Systematic Trading



Chapter overview

  The importance of risk         Why getting your appetite for risk right is so important and the
  targeting                      key issues involved.

  Setting your volatility        The measure of how much risk you’re prepared to take and how
  target                         to calculate it.

  Rolling up profits and         How your volatility target should be adjusted when you lose or
  losses                         make money.

  What percentage of             Relating the volatility targeting concept to traditional money
  capital per trade              management where you limit bets to a specific percentage of
                                 capital.




The importance of risk targeting
Deciding your overall trading risk is the most important decision you will have to make
when designing your trading system. Nearly all amateur traders lose money and most do
so because their positions are too large compared to their account size.97 Suffering painful
losses is the main reason why both amateurs and professionals meddle with trading
systems rather than letting them run unimpeded.
Making this decision correctly involves understanding two things. Firstly you must
understand your system, in particular its likely performance and whether it’s likely to have
positive or negative skew. You must avoid overconfidence, as I discussed in chapter one.
You should not extrapolate over-fitted back-test results to create high expectations of
return. Are you sure your strategy can generate a Sharpe ratio of 2.0 after costs? Are you
really, really sure?
Next you must understand yourself, in a complete and honest way. Can you face the
possibility of regularly losing 5%, 10% or 20% of your own capital in a day?
These points also apply to those paid to manage other people’s money. Additionally
professionals need to understand their clients’ tolerance for losing money. If investors
aren’t truly comfortable with the risks being taken then you will see them redeeming in
droves when large losses occur.




97. The other reason is that they trade too much, which is covered in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.

136
                                                                              Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


Setting a volatility target
Imaginary conversation between a financial advisor and myself:
    Financial ‘expert’: “How much risk do you want to take?”
    Me: “What do you mean by risk?”
    Financial ‘expert’: “Er... well how would you define your tolerance for losing
    money?”
    Me: “Well it could be how much I’m prepared to lose next year. Or tomorrow. Or
    next week. Are you talking about the absolute maximum loss I can cope with, or
    the average, or the worst loss I’d expect 95 days out of 100 (the so called ‘Value at
    Risk’)? Which question would you like me to answer?”
    Financial ‘expert’: “Hold on. I need to speak to my supervisor...”
Joking aside, how do we answer this deceptively simple question? To keep things simple I
use a single figure to measure appetite for risk – an expected standard deviation, which
I call the volatility target. You can measure this as a percentage, or in cash terms, and
over different time periods. So for example the daily cash volatility target is the average
expected standard deviation of the daily portfolio returns. As it’s a cash value you need to
specify the currency that your account or fund is denominated in.
When I first discussed risk on page 39 I talked about predictable and unpredictable
risks. Your volatility target is the long-term average of expected, predictable, risk. The exact
predictable risk you have on any given day will depend on the strength of your forecasts,
and on the current expected correlation of asset prices. You’ll also face unpredictable risks
if your forecast of volatility or correlations is wrong. In any case the actual amount you
lose or gain on any given day will be random, since even a perfect estimation of risk only
tells you what your average gains and losses will be.
I find it’s easier to look at an annualised cash volatility target, which will be the annualised
expected daily standard deviation of returns. As before you annualise by multiplying by
the square root of time; given there are around 256 trading days in a year this will be
16. Beware: the annualised volatility target isn’t the maximum, or even the average, you
might expect to lose in a year.98 Indeed it’s quite probable you will sometimes lose more
than that in a year.



98. There are several reasons why your expected average annual loss wouldn’t be equal to the annualised
expected daily standard deviation. Firstly, if your Sharpe ratio is greater than zero then your expected
average annual loss will be smaller than one sigma. Secondly, in the event of losses you’d probably reduce
your positions if you’re using trend following rules or stop losses. Thirdly, as you’ll see in the next chapter
‘Position Sizing’, you should reduce your positions when price volatility rises, which reduces losses in periods
of rising risk. Also, as you’ll see later in this chapter, you’d reduce your risk target throughout the year if you
made losses, and vice versa. More technically if consecutive returns aren’t independent, and have time series
autocorrelation, then annualising by multiplying by 16 is a poor approximation.

                                                                                                               137
Systematic Trading



It’s also easier to separate out your cash account value and the appropriate level of risk
to run on that money. The amount of cash you are trading with is your trading capital.
You then decide what your volatility target will be as a percentage of that capital. If
you multiply this percentage volatility target by your trading capital, then you’ll get
your volatility target in cash terms. So with a million dollars of trading capital and an
annualised 10% percentage volatility target, you would have an annualised cash volatility
target of $100,000.
In the rest of the chapter I’ll be dealing with the implications of where you set your
trading capital and percentage volatility target, rather than setting your cash volatility
target directly. This means that amateur traders with £1,000 in their account can use the
same guidelines to set percentage volatility target as multi-billion Euro hedge funds.
Here are the points to consider when setting your trading capital and percentage volatility
targets:
1. How much can you lose?: How much money do you have to trade or invest?
2. How much risk can you cope with?: Can you afford to lose it all? Can you afford
   to lose half? What probability of losing half would you be comfortable with? What
   probability of losing 90% of it over ten years would make you lose sleep?
3. Can you realise that risk?: Given the instruments you are investing in and the safe
   amount of leverage (if any) you can use, can you actually hit the risk target?
4. Is this level of risk right for your system?: Given the characteristics of your trading
   system, expected Sharpe ratio and skew, does the amount of risk make sense?

How much can you lose?
The initial trading capital is the amount of cash you start with, bearing in mind that
there is a chance that you might lose all or nearly all of it, although hopefully that’s
quite unlikely. I’ll show you below how to set your percentage volatility target based on
exactly how relaxed you are about losses.
For an institutional investor things are usually straightforward; you are given £100
million and you would use 100% of it. Sometimes you might not go ‘all in’ if you have
guaranteed some of the capital, or need to retain cash for potential redemptions.
If you’re investing your own money then your trading capital will depend on your savings
and how much you are willing to commit to such a risky endeavour. In any case – and I
can’t emphasise this enough – never put in more than you can afford to lose. Never trade
with borrowed money, or money earmarked to pay off debts.99 Even if you follow the
advice in this book to the letter there is still a remote chance that you will be unlucky
enough to burn through virtually your entire account.

99. This isn’t a ban on leverage, but if your trading capital is £100,000 you should actually have that available
to lose, and none of it should be borrowed. I’ll discuss leverage in more detail below.

138
                                                                          Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


Can you cope with the risk?
Let’s say you decide to put $100,000 of trading capital into your account and run with
a 200% volatility target; equating to an annualised cash volatility target of $200,000.
Could you cope with losing $20,000 in one day? What about having a cumulative loss,
or draw-down, of over $60,000? If it isn’t your money, could your client cope with it?
I hope so because you’re likely to see those kinds of losses within the first few weeks of
trading! As table 20 shows, a $20,000 loss would typically be seen every month, and a
$62,000 cumulative loss around 10% of the time.100


TABLE 20: WHAT KIND OF LOSSES DO WE SEE FOR A PARTICULAR VOLATILITY TARGET?

                                                    Percentage volatility target

  Expected                                 25%            50%           100%           200%

  Worst daily loss each month            $2,500          $5,000       $10,000         $20,000

  Worst weekly loss each year            $6,900         $14,000       $28,000         $55,000

  Worst monthly loss every ten           $16,000        $32,000       $63,000        $80,000
  years

  Worst daily loss every 30              $5,400         $11,000       $22,000         $43,000
  years

  10% of the time, the                   $9,300         $15,000       $30,500         $62,000
  cumulative loss will be at
  least

  1% of the time, the cumulative         $11,000        $18,500       $37,000         $75,000
  loss will be at least


The table shows various expected losses (rows), and different percentage volatility targets
(columns), given trading capital of $100,000, assuming Sharpe ratio 0.5 and zero skew
with Gaussian normal returns.


Now, table 20 assumes you have zero skew in your returns. Are you running a positive
skew trend following system, or a negative skew relative value or carry rule? Systems
with different skew have varying risk properties. As table 21 shows, the worst days, weeks
and months for a negative skew strategy are much nastier than with zero skew. For positive

100. I’ve assumed a Sharpe ratio (SR) of 0.5 here, and the returns are drawn from a Gaussian normal
distribution. Using a different SR won’t affect these numbers much, although the annual loss figures will be
slightly better (worse) if the true Sharpe is higher (lower).

                                                                                                        139
Systematic Trading



skew strategies large losses are much less likely, as you can see in table 22. However the
typical cumulative loss is higher.
With negative skew it’s vital to have sufficient capital to cope with the very bad days,
weeks and months you will occasionally see. This is especially true with high leverage and
the risk your broker will make a margin call at the worst possible time. With positive skew
the difficulty is psychological; committing to a system when you spend most of your time
suffering cumulative losses.


TABLE 21: HOW DO TYPICAL LOSSES LOOK WITH NEGATIVE SKEW? INDIVIDUAL LOSSES ARE
HIGHER THAN IN TABLE 20, BUT CUMULATIVE LOSSES ARE SMALLER

                                                      Percentage volatility
                                                             target

  Expected                                              25%             50%

  Worst daily loss each month                          $3,100         $6,100

  Worst weekly loss each year                         $8,500          $17,000

  Worst monthly loss every ten years                  $18,100        $36,000

  Worst daily loss every 30 years                     $11,500        $23,000

  10% of the time, the cumulative loss will           $3,700          $7,400
  be at least

  1% of the time, the cumulative loss will             $7,100         $14,000
  be at least


The table shows various expected losses (rows) and different percentage volatility targets
(columns), for a negative skew option selling strategy given trading capital of $100,000.101
The strategy has a Sharpe ratio of 0.5 and skew of around -2.




101. Results are from a back-test of a strategy which involves persistently selling futures option straddles.

140
                                                                      Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


TABLE 22: HOW DO LOSS PATTERNS CHANGE FOR POSITIVE SKEW? WITH POSITIVE SKEW
INDIVIDUAL LOSSES ARE MUCH BETTER THAN IN TABLES 20 AND 21, BUT AVERAGE CUMULATIVE
LOSSES A LITTLE WORSE

                                            Percentage volatility
                                                   target

 Expected                                     25%            50%

 Worst daily loss each month                 $2,000         $4,000

 Worst weekly loss each year                 $6,100        $12,000

 Worst monthly loss every ten years         $15,000        $30,000

 Worst daily loss every 30 years             $2,800         $5,700

 10% of the time, the cumulative loss        $11,000       $22,000
 will be at least

 1% of the time, the cumulative loss        $12,000        $24,000
 will be at least


This table shows various expected losses (rows) given different percentage volatility
targets (columns), for a positive skew trend following strategy, with trading capital of
$100,000.102 The strategy has a Sharpe ratio of 0.5 and skew of around 1.0.


Earlier I said you could frame risk by how much you are prepared to lose in a lifetime.
That’s difficult to quantify without knowing your life expectancy, so let’s assume you
will trade for ten years. In table 23 I show the chances of ending a decade-long trading
career with less than half, and less than 10%, of your trading capital left, given a certain
percentage target volatility.
Only you know how much risk you can cope with. However you, or your clients, must
be able to stomach the likely losses involved. If you can’t then you should set a lower
percentage volatility target, or if possible consider using less initial trading capital.




102. Figures from back-testing a futures system using a mixture of relatively fast trend following rule
variations.

                                                                                                    141
Systematic Trading



TABLE 23: WHAT ARE THE CHANCES OF LOSING ALL, OR MOST, OF MY MONEY?

                                            Percentage volatility target

                                      25%          50%         100%         200%

  Chance of losing half               <1%           10%         40%          93%

  Chance of losing 90%                <1%           1.1%        22%          88%


The table shows chances of ending a ten-year trading career losing a given proportion
(rows), of initial trading capital given different percentage volatility targets, assuming
Sharpe ratio is 0.50 and zero skew.103



Can you realise that risk?
If you’re investing in leveraged derivatives like futures and spread bets then very high
levels of risk are attainable, even if they aren’t desirable. Such systems can easily run at
over 100% annualised target volatility with margin to spare.
But if you can’t get enough, or any, leverage then you might have a problem achieving
your target volatility. If you are buying short-term government bonds with an expected
volatility of perhaps 5% a year, then without leverage it’s impossible to create a portfolio
with a 50% volatility target. With no leverage you are restricted to the amount of natural
risk that your instruments have. With only 100% leverage you are limited to twice that
natural risk, and so on.
Because it’s mostly a problem for non-leveraged asset allocating investors I’ll go into
more detail about this in the relevant part of part four, chapter fourteen.

Is there too much leverage?
Even if you are able to leverage up as required to hit a particular percentage volatility
target, it would be very unwise if excessive gearing is needed. This is particularly
problematic for negative skew instruments and trading strategies, which tend to have low
natural risk – until they blow up.
I’ve mentioned before the huge appreciation of the Swiss franc that happened in just
minutes in January 2015. At the start of the day in question the natural risk of holding
a position in EUR/CHF was tiny, at around 1% a year. If this was the only instrument
you were trading then to achieve a 50% annualised volatility target would have needed


103. The results would be slightly worse for negative skew, and slightly better for positive skew. For example
with a 200% volatility target the chances of losing half your capital over ten years are 90% with positive skew
of 1.0 and 97% with negative skew of -2.0.

142
                                                                            Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


50 times leverage. Retail FX brokers had no compunction in allowing this, with leverage
up to 500 times available from some providers.
If you had been on the wrong side of this move, with your entire trading capital leveraged
50 times, then a 2% appreciation would have wiped you out. But the actual move was
over 16%! Only those with leverage of 7 times or less would have survived the day, which
implies a maximum achievable 7% volatility target.
You should ensure that with a given percentage volatility target any individual position
would not wipe you out after the largest conceivable move. Diversifying amongst many
different instruments will also help, and we’ll return to that in chapter eleven, ‘Portfolios’.
A 16% move with 50 times leverage would have been just about survivable if EUR/CHF
was only 10% of your portfolio, assuming no other losses had occured elsewhere.
Ideally such low volatility instruments, requiring insanely high leverage, should be
excluded from any trading system.

Is this the right level of risk?
Suppose you’ve decided on a 200% volatility target. You’ve got the leverage you need;
but you haven’t got carried away. Furthermore you’re confident that you will cope with
the spectacularly bumpy ride tables 20 to 23 imply you’ll be getting. Assuming you are a
profitable trader, should you then set your target at 200% and expect to end up incredibly
wealthy through the magic of compound interest?
The short answer is no. There is a Goldilocks level of risk – not too little and not too
much. Even if you are willing and able to go above this level you shouldn’t, as you will
end up with more than your tongue getting burnt.
Naively if you expect to be profitable then you should bet as much as you’re allowed to.
However this ignores the compounding of returns over time. Suppose you have a fantastic
expected average return of 100% on each trade for a given bet size. You then lose 90% of
your capital on your first trade and make 190% on your next trade. Unfortunately there
is only 29% of your cash left, even though you’ve achieved the expected average return of
100% per trade.104 To maximise your final profits, the optimal bet to make is actually a
quarter of the original size.
Nearly all professional gamblers, many professional money managers and some amateurs
in both fields know that this optimal point should be calculated using something called
the Kelly criterion.105 Kelly has some useful but potentially dangerous implications for
how you should set your percentage volatility target.

104. After the first loss you have 10% of your capital left. A 190% return on this generates another 19%,
for a total of 29%.
105. The Kelly criterion maximises the geometric mean of returns, which is what we get from compounding.
It was invented by physicist John Kelly in 1956. There is an excellent and highly readable book on this subject
– Fortune’s Formula by William Poundstone.

                                                                                                           143
Systematic Trading



A simple formula can be used to determine how you should set your volatility target,
given the underlying Sharpe ratio (SR) of your trading system. You should set your
volatility target at the same level as your expected SR. So if you think your annualised SR
will be 0.25 then you should have a 25% annualised volatility target.
You can see this in figure 21, where for an SR 0.5 system the best performance is achieved
with the optimal 50% volatility target. This is true for all three systems shown, regardless
of skew.


FIGURE 21: KELLY CRITERION IMPLIES THE OPTIMAL RISK PERCENTAGE FOR A SHARPE RATIO
0.5 SYSTEM IS 50%. WITH HIGHER RISK THINGS GO BADLY, ESPECIALLY FOR NEGATIVE SKEW
STRATEGIES.




The X-axis shows the percentage volatility target and the Y-axis the geometric mean of
returns which Kelly optimises.




144
                                                               Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


TABLE 24: BIG SHARPE MEANS BIGGER RISK AND EXPONENTIALLY BIGGER PROFITS

 Expected          Optimum
 Sharpe           percentage           Expected
 ratio          volatility target       return

 0.2                  20%                 4%

 0.5                  50%                 25%

 0.75                 75%                 56%

 1.0                 100%                100%

 2.0                 200%                400%


The table shows the expected annual return (as a percentage of trading capital), given
different Sharpe ratio (SR) (rows) and using the optimal Kelly percentage volatility target.
Expected return is SR multiplied by percentage volatility target.


This finding is potentially dangerous when used by an over confident investor. It’s very
easy with back-testing software to get over-fitted performance with a Sharpe ratio (SR)
of 2, 3 or even higher. If you believe those are attainable then a risk percentage of 100% or
200% seems justified. As table 24 shows, running at a 200% risk with SR of 2.0 implies
huge returns of 400% a year!
Unfortunately many people with capital of $20,000 will conclude it’s possible to earn
400% a year, or $80,000, as full-time traders. There are also plenty of brokers who will
happily provide them with the necessary leverage. Most of these people will quickly lose
their $20,000, as they won’t achieve their expected SR. It’s very difficult to know exactly
what your true Sharpe ratio really would have been in the past, with back-tests giving you
only a rough upwardly estimate, and it’s utterly impossible to know what SR to expect in
the future.
Even if you had a crystal ball, and knew your expected Sharpe precisely, you could be
unlucky and have a decade or more of sub-par performance. Figure 21 shows that if
you realise an SR of only 0.5 then a 200% volatility target will see you ending up deep
underwater. In general if you get your estimate of SR wrong and bet more than the
optimal then you have a high chance of losing your shirt.

Recommended percentage volatility targets
I run a highly diversified futures trading system with around 45 instruments, eight
trading rules drawn from four different styles, and 30 trading rule variations. In a 35
year back-test, conservatively fitted with out of sample bootstrapping, it has a Sharpe
ratio (SR) of around 1.0 after costs, but the highest volatility target I’d advocate using

                                                                                             145
Systematic Trading



for it is 37%, rather than the 100% suggested by the Kelly criterion and the back-tested
SR.106 Why such a conservative number – am I a wimp?
There are several reasons for my caution. Firstly, it’s unlikely a back-tested SR will be
achieved in the future. On average realised performance is never as good as in back-tests.
This is because it’s very easy to over-fit if you ignore the advice in chapters three and four.
Additionally it’s difficult with ideas first testing to avoid using only trading rules that you
already know would have worked.
Even if you could avoid over-fitting actual profits are unlikely to be as high as they could
have been in the past. This is because future asset returns are likely to be lower than
in the historical data set we usually use for back-testing, as I discussed in chapter two,
‘Systematic Trading Rules’, in the section on achievable Sharpe ratios (from page 46).
To find realistic achievable SR from back-test results a good rule of thumb is to use the
ratios in table 14 (page 90). These suggest that for an out of sample bootstrap, as I’ve
used in my own system, a ratio of 0.75 should be applied to find a more realistic Sharpe
ratio. Much lower ratios should be used if you haven’t been as careful with your fitting.
I also said in chapter two that I think the absolute maximum SR that staunch systems
traders should expect to achieve is 1.0, regardless of how good their back-test is.
Secondly, using the full Kelly criteria is far too aggressive, because of the risk of getting
a poor run of luck and the large drawdowns that can result, even if SR expectations are
correct.107 In table 23 someone using the correct Kelly target of 50% would have a 10%
chance of losing half their money after ten years; which most people would find worrying.
It’s far better to use Half-Kelly and set your risk at half the optimal. Column A of table
25 shows the recommended percentage volatility target for a given realistic back-tested
SR.
For my own system I started with the back-tested Sharpe ratio of 1.0. Multiplying by 0.75
(as I’m using out of sample bootstrapping) from table 14, this gives me a realistic SR of
0.75. With full Kelly criterion betting that would be a 75% volatility target, which I then
halved to get 37% (rounding down).
This assumes your trading system, like mine, has zero or positive skew. You should be
very careful if you have expected negative skew. As figure 21 shows, the penalty for too
much risk is greater with negative skew than when skew is positive, or zero. As I discussed
in chapter two, many negative skew strategies have fantastic SR in back-test, but I advise
you to run them at half the risk you’d use for a more benign trading system. Column B of
table 25 shows the recommended percentage volatility target for negative skew systems.



106. At the time of writing I’m using a 25% volatility target, reflecting my relatively low appetite for risk.
107. Here is famous Kelly fan, hedge fund manager and Blackjack card counter Ed Thorpe: “My experience
has been that most cautious … investors who use Kelly find the frequency of substantial bankroll reductions
to be uncomfortably large.” (Quoted in Fortune’s Formula.)

146
                                                                 Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


TABLE 25: WHAT VOLATILITY TARGET SHOULD STAUNCH SYSTEMS TRADERS USE?

                        Recommended percentage
                            volatility target

   Realistic back-     (A) Skew>0      (B) Negative
     tested SR                             skew

        0.25               12%              6%

        0.40               20%              10%

        0.50               25%              12%

        0.75               37%              19%

     1.0 or more           50%             25%


The table shows the recommended percentage volatility target for those who can back-
test their dynamic trading systems, depending on the skew of returns (columns) and
achievable back-tested Sharpe ratios (SR) (rows) after making adjustments to simulated
results from table 14 on page 90. Optimal volatility target is calculated using Half-Kelly.
For negative skew strategies this is cut in half again. We assume a maximum SR of 1.0 is
achievable.


The returns of asset allocating investors are limited by their use of a static trading
strategy. With a small, relatively undiversified portfolio you shouldn’t expect high Sharpe
ratios. As I said in chapter two, if you’re holding a dozen equities in different industries
but from the same country then you probably will achieve an SR of around 0.20. Those
with larger portfolios diversified across multiple asset classes could get a maximum
realistic SR of 0.4.
Column C of table 26 shows the correct targets given asset allocators’ SR expectations.
However, as you’ll see in chapter fourteen, it’s unlikely even this level of volatility can be
achieved as these investors don’t use leverage.
Semi-automatic traders have systems which cannot be back-tested and usually have a
small, relatively un-diversified, set of ad-hoc instruments. I would initially assume an
achievable SR of 0.20 unless you are very experienced, are trading across multiple asset
classes, and have a good track record with real money. As you saw in chapter two, in my
opinion an SR of 0.5 is the maximum safe achievable level, so you should set the volatility
target at no more than 25%.
Again the target should be halved if you are trading a strategy that is likely to have negative
skew, such as selling option volatility, or exhibits a similar return pattern with steady
profits on most bets with occasional large losses. Columns D and E of table 26 show the
appropriate volatility targets for this type of trader.

                                                                                               147
Systematic Trading



TABLE 26: WHAT VOLATILITY TARGET SHOULD ASSET ALLOCATING INVESTORS AND SEMI-
AUTOMATIC TRADERS USE?



                                  Recommended percentage volatility target

                     (C) Asset          (D) Semi-automatic        (E) Semi-automatic
   Expected          allocating       trader, zero or positive   trader, negative skew
      SR              investor                  skew

      0.20              10%                    10%                           5%

      0.30              15%                     15%                          7%

      0.40             20%                     20%                           10%

  0.5 or more          20%                     25%                           12%


This table shows the recommended percentage volatility target depending on the type
of trader and expected skew (columns), and Sharpe ratio (SR) expectations (rows). The
optimal volatility target is calculated using Half-Kelly. We assume asset allocators shouldn’t
expect more than 0.40 SR and semi-automatic traders won’t get more than 0.50 SR. Asset
allocators are assumed to have zero skew. We halve volatility targets for negative skew
semi-automatic trading.


This implies that nobody will use more than a maximum 50% volatility target and most
people should use less. Tables 20 to 23 illustrate that a 50% annualised volatility will
mean some pretty substantial losses from time to time. Just because the volatility targets
in tables 25 and 26 are optimal it doesn’t mean they will suit you, or that your broker will
permit them. It just means you should never run a higher risk target than this.

When the percentage volatility target should be changed
I don’t advocate changing your percentage volatility target since there is a potential risk
of meddling; reducing it when you don’t trust your system and increasing it when it agrees
with you. The exception is if you have grossly miscalculated your tolerance for risk. You
begin trading on day one with a 50% target, but the first big loss then sends you or your
investors into a panic. In this case you should significantly reduce your percentage target.
However it should ideally be a one off change and only ever downwards.
To avoid this scenario it’s better to start with significantly lower trading capital and
gradually increase it until you have the full amount invested. Keep the percentage
volatility target fixed and allow your cash volatility to increase up to the point just before
you get uncomfortable. This also helps with gaining confidence in your trading strategy
and testing any automated systems.


148
                                                                            Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


Rolling up profits and losses
Once set your percentage volatility target shouldn’t need changing. However your
trading capital will definitely change from its initial value. This implies that your cash
volatility target will also be adjusted over time.
Let’s imagine you have trading capital of $100,000 and after reading this chapter you’ve
decided on a 30% volatility target. You begin trading with the appropriate $30,000
annualised cash volatility target. Then on day one you lose $2,000. Should you continue
to use a $30,000 volatility target?
You should not. The implication of the Kelly criterion is that you should adjust your risk
according to your current capital. You did have $100,000 of capital, but now you only have
$98,000. Instead of having a 30% volatility target ($30,000 of $100,000) you effectively
have a target of $30,000 divided by $98,000 = 30.6%. This might not seem a big deal, but
you are now betting more than you intended and you’ve slightly increased your chances of
going bankrupt. If you make further losses the situation could deteriorate fast.
The correct thing to do is to reduce your volatility target to 30% of your current capital
of $98,000, or $29,400.
Now suppose things start to improve and you make $2,000 back. Your accumulated
losses have reduced to zero and your volatility target will be back to 30% of $100,000,
or $30,000. After another profitable day making $3,000 you’re now in positive territory
with an account value of $103,000 – higher than your starting capital. Should you now
increase your risk appetite above its initial level?
If you want to maximise your wealth then Kelly says you should roll up your profits and
increase your capital.108 The new volatility target will be 30% of $103,000, or $30,900.
This means you will be compounding your returns, which over the long run will increase
them faster.
You should also reduce your trading capital, and hence your cash volatility target, if
you withdraw money from your trading account or investors redeem. Similarly if you
put more funds in then you would normally increase your maximum capital. There are
exceptions such as if you are putting cash into a leveraged account to meet margin or
reduce borrowing, but you don’t want to increase the amount of capital at risk.
In my own trading an automated process checks my account value, and adjusts risk
accordingly, on an hourly basis. If your system is not automated and if you are running
with more than a 15% volatility target I would recommend checking at least daily. With a
lower target you can check more infrequently, but if you’re using leverage I’d advise always
calculating your volatility target at least once a week.

108. Someone who is trading as a hobby and starting with a small stake would probably do this. Those
investing other people’s money should also add all profits after fees to their trading capital, so that returns
are compounded, unless they are committed to paying coupons or guaranteeing a certain proportion of
the initial investment made. If you are more risk averse then rolling up profits might not make sense, if for
example you live partly or wholly off your trading income. This is the approach that I take.
                                                                                                           149
Systematic Trading



What percentage of capital per trade?
Traditional money management systems allocate a certain percentage of trading capital
to be risked on each trade or bet. If you’re familiar with these systems you might be
wondering how this relates to the volatility targeting done here. It is possible to infer the
percentage volatility target that is implied for a particular trading system if you know
the approximate holding period, the average number of positions held and the maximum
amount of capital put at risk on each trade. You just need to assume that the average bet
is half the maximum, which is the same ratio between my recommended average forecast
of 10 and maximum of 20.
Table 27 gives the results, assuming an average of two positions are held at once. If a
greater or fewer number are traded on average, then you just need to multiply or divide
the figures appropriately. So with an average of four positions you’d double them, and for
a single position halve them.


TABLE 27: WHAT IS THE VOLATILITY IMPLIED BY A TRADING SYSTEM’S HOLDING PERIOD AND
BET SIZE?

                                    Implied percentage volatility target

                             Maximum percentage of capital at risk per trade

 Average holding            1%         2.5%         5%          10%        20%
 period

 1 day                     40%         100%        200%          !          !

 1 week                     16%        40%         80%         160%         !

 2 weeks                    8%          19%        38%          76%        152%

 6 weeks                    4%         10%          21%         41%        82%

 3 months                   3%          7%          13%         27%        53%


The table shows the implied annualised percentage volatility target for a given average
holding period (rows) and maximum percentage of capital allocated to each bet (columns),
assuming an average of two bets are held in the portfolio. “!” indicates volatility greater
than 200% per year.


As an example take the system which I briefly discussed in the introductory chapter. This
held positions for around a week, with no more than 10% of capital at risk. Let’s assume
on average that two bets are made at once, although the author wasn’t clear on this point
(a common shortcoming in trading books).

150
                                                                    Chapter Nine. Volatility targeting


This all sounds fairly sedate but from the table this works out to a suicidal 160% volatility
target. If this target is Kelly optimal then the achievable Sharpe ratio must be at least
1.6, implying an expected return of 1.6 × 160% or 256% a year! There is some serious
overconfidence at work here. Worse still, this is nowhere near the most aggressive system
I’ve ever seen.


Summary of volatility targeting

 Percentage          Desired long run expectation of annualised standard deviation of
 volatility target   percentage portfolio returns. A maximum of:
                     • The level of risk that you are comfortable with given tables 20 to 23.
                     • What is practically attainable given your access to leverage and the
                     natural risk of your instruments (see the asset allocating investor example
                     in part four for more details).
                     • The highest level that is safe given the natural volatility of your
                     instruments, and how much leverage they need. Avoid very low volatility
                     instruments requiring insanely high leverage.
                     • The recommended percentage volatility in tables 25 and 26, depending
                     on the back-tested or expected Sharpe ratio and skew of your trading
                     system, and the type of trader or investor you are.
                     Percentage volatility target should remain unchanged.

 Trading capital     The amount of capital you currently have at risk in your account.
                     Every day you should add profits and any injections of funds. Deduct any
                     losses and withdrawals made from the account.
                     Measured in currency.

 Annualised          Long run expectation of annualised standard deviation of daily portfolio
 cash volatility     returns. Equal to the trading capital multiplied by the percentage volatility
 target              target.
                     Measured in currency.

 Daily cash          Long run expectation of daily standard deviation of daily portfolio returns.
 volatility target   Annualised cash volatility target divided by ‘the square root of time’,
                     which for a 256 business day year is 16.
                     Measured in currency.


In the next chapter I will come back to the final piece of advice I got from Sergei and
think about how the risk of an instrument determines what size position we should take.




                                                                                                  151
Chapter Ten. Position Sizing
                                                      Instruments

 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X

                                                                                                                    Portfolio
                                                Combined                               Subsystem                    weighted
 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for                                                     position in X
 variation 2       instrument X                 forecast X                                                          position in X


                                     weights                   targeting    sizing                     weights
 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X



                                                                                                       Instrument
                                                               Volatility   Position
 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast,

                                     Forecast
 variation 1       instrument Y


                                                Combined                                                            Portfolio
 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for                                                     Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2       instrument Y                 forecast Y                             position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument Y

                                          Customising for speed and size




L   ET’S COME BACK TO SERGEI’S THREE QUESTIONS FROM CHAPTER
    seven. First, how much do you like this trade? This is the forecast for each instrument.
Secondly, how much can you afford to lose? You should know how many chips of trading
capital you’re willing to put down on the hypothetical casino baize depending on your
desired target volatility.
So far, so good. But how many shares, bonds, spread bet points or futures contracts
should you actually buy or sell? What does a combined forecast of -6 and a £1,000,000
annualised cash target volatility mean in practice if you’re trading crude oil futures in
New York? To answer this we need to come back to Sergei’s third question: how risky is
your trade?


                                                                                                                                    153
Systematic Trading



Once you know this you can move from the abstract world of forecasts and trading rules
to deciding the size of actual positions in real financial instruments.


Chapter overview

  How risky is it?                 If you own one unit of an instrument how much risk does that
                                   expose you to?

  Volatility target and            What is the relationship between your cash volatility target and
  position risk                    the risk of each instrument?

  From forecast to position        Given how confident you are in your forecasts, the cash volatility
                                   target you have and the position risk, what size position should
                                   you be holding?




How risky is it?
What is the expected risk of holding an instrument?109 If you own one Apple share or one
crude oil futures contract, how much danger are you exposed to?

Position block and block value
Let’s start by asking a philosophical question. What exactly is ‘one’ of an instrument? I
define this as the instrument block. If ‘one’ of an instrument goes up in price by 1% how
much do you gain or lose? This is the block value.
These definitions will seem trivial to equity investors. ‘One’ Apple share is exactly that –
one Apple share. If a share has a price of $400 it will cost exactly $400 to buy one block.
If the price goes up by 1% from $400 to $404 then you will gain $4. Apple shares, and
most other equities, have a natural instrument block of one share and a block value of
1% of the price. Sometimes though to reduce costs you’ll trade in larger blocks, usually
of 100 shares. In this case the block value will be 100 × 1% × share price, which is equal
to the cost of one share.
But life isn’t always that simple. For example you can use a UK financial spread betting
firm to bet on the FTSE falling at £10 a point. If the FTSE rises 1% from 6500 to 6565
you would lose £650. Here the block value is ten times 1% of the price.
Futures contracts also have non-trivial block values. WTI crude oil futures on NYMEX
are quoted in dollars per barrel. But each futures contract is for 1000 barrels. This means

109. Notice we’re dealing here with expected, predictable risk, as discussed on page 39.

154
                                                                               Chapter Ten. Position Sizing


a 1% move up in price from $75 to $75.75 will net you $750 on a long position of one
contract, giving a block value of $750.
A Eurodollar future represents the cost of nominally borrowing $1 million for three
months and is priced at 100 minus the annual interest rate. If the price rises by 1% from
98.00 to 98.98 then the rate of interest payable has fallen from 2% to 1.02%. Because
three months is a quarter of a year you will have saved $1 million × 0.98% × 0.25 =
$2,450 in interest on your loan. The block value is $2,450.110

Price volatility
We’ve established that a 1% fall in quoted price will cause a certain degree of pain, equal
to the block value, for each instrument block of an instrument that you’re long. But
how likely is a 1% fall in price? Equity prices can easily change by 1% or more in minutes,
but a two-year bond might not see a 1% move over several months. How should you take
these different levels of risk into account?
This is another job for volatility standardisation. You need to calculate an expected
standard deviation of daily instrument percentage returns, which I’m going to define
as the price volatility of an instrument. So for example the price volatility of an average
equity is around 1%, whereas as I write this the German two-year Schatz bond future has
a daily standard deviation of just 0.02%.



    CONCEPT: MEASURING RECENT STANDARD DEVIATION
    Remember that my standard definition of predictable risk (from page 39) is the
    expected daily standard deviation of prices. One of the simplest ways to estimate
    future volatility is to use a measure of recent standard deviation. This works
    surprisingly well because volatility tends to persist; if the market has been crazy
    over the last few weeks it will probably continue to be crazy for a few more weeks.
    I recommend using one of three methods to calculate recent standard deviation.
    The first method is to eyeball the chart. If you look at figure 22 you can see that
    the average daily change in crude oil futures over the last month of the chart is
    around $1.0 a day, or 1.33% of the final price of $75. This method is fine for
    semi-automatic traders who will probably be staring at charts anyway, but I don’t
    recommend it for others.
    The second method is to calculate the precise standard deviation of price changes
    over a moving window of time – the volatility look-back period. You can use a


110. There are even more complicated cases such as options, interest rate swaps and credit derivatives but I
do not cover these here.

                                                                                                        155
Systematic Trading



      short window like ten business days (around two weeks), or a longer one such as
      100 days.
      As the upper panel of figure 23 shows, shorter windows mean your volatility
      estimate is noisy, which as you’ll see in chapter twelve will mean higher trading
      costs, but reacts very quickly to changes. The slower estimate is smoother, however
      it takes longer to adjust to new volatility environments. It’s not obvious which
      look-back would be best.
      In my research I found almost no difference in performance before costs for look-
      back periods from a few days up to six months in length.111 Rather than risk over-
      fitting I decided on a default look-back of 25 business days, or five weeks. This
      corresponds to the most popular value used across the industry, for example by the
      RiskMetrics (TM) system.112 I’ll discuss in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, when
      and why you’d use a longer look-back for instruments that are expensive to trade.
      The lower panel of figure 23 shows the volatility estimation using a 25 day look-
      back. It also shows the estimate coming from my third method, which is to use an
      exponential weighted moving average (EWMA) of standard deviation.
      This gives a smoother measure than a simple moving average that still reacts quickly
      to significant changes in the state of the market. I’ve chosen the default look-back
      for this as 36 days, which is equivalent to a 25 day window for a simple moving
      average.113 Details of how to calculate volatility with both kinds of moving average
      are shown in appendix D on page 298.
      Using recent price volatility is generally a good way to get the right risk adjusted
      position size. However it would be a disaster if you were using this method to trade
      Credit Default Swaps in early 2007, the front of the Eurodollar futures curve at
      any time in the US zero interest rate period, or for that matter Swiss franc FX in
      early January 2015.
      During all of these periods there was really low price volatility. If volatility is low
      then you would buy large numbers of instrument blocks, since each block has
      very little expected risk. But after periods of calm markets have a nasty habit of
      becoming crazy overnight, leaving you with dangerously large positions.
      As I’ve already mentioned in earlier chapters, holding very low volatility assets is
      generally a bad idea, and this is yet another reason to avoid them.



111. Much slower than six months and performance gets steadily worse.
112. As of 2015 RiskMetrics (TM) is owned by MSCI but it was originally developed by JP Morgan. It uses
an exponentially weighted moving average whose half-life is equivalent to that of a 25 day simple moving
average.
113. The two measures have the same half-life when using a 25 day look-back for the simple moving average,
and 36 days for exponentially weighted.

156
                                                          Chapter Ten. Position Sizing


FIGURE 22: PRICE AND DAILY CHANGES IN CRUDE OIL FUTURES




FIGURE 23: MEASURING CRUDE OIL PRICE VOLATILITY USING SIMPLE MOVING AVERAGE (MA)
AND EXPONENTIALLY WEIGHTED (EWMA) STANDARD DEVIATIONS WITH VARIOUS LOOK-
BACKS, IN DAYS




                                                                                  157
Systematic Trading



Returning to the example I opened the chapter with, if you use the bottom panel of figure
23 the price volatility of crude oil futures here is around $1 per day, which is 1.33% of
the final price shown ($75).

Instrument currency volatility
If one oil futures contract has a block value of $750, and a price volatility of 1.333%,
then what is the risk of owning one contract? This is the instrument currency volatility;
it’s the expected standard deviation of daily returns from owning one instrument block
in the currency of the instrument. For oil futures you’d expect on any given day to see a
price move of around 1.33% and since each 1% price move will cost you $750, your daily
profit or loss will average around 1.33 × $750 = $997.50. So the instrument currency
volatility for WTI crude oil futures is $997.50. This value shouldn’t be rounded.
In general instrument currency volatility is equal to the block value multiplied by the
price volatility. It will be in the same currency in which the block value is measured.

What’s that in real money?
This is all fine if you are a US investor trading crude oil futures, a Brit trading UK
equities, or a Euro area investor buying German bonds. However many investors and
traders will want to buy and sell in currencies that are different from their trading capital.
The instrument currency volatility isn’t good enough. Instead you need to know the
volatility of the instrument value in the currency of your account, which will be the same
currency as your cash volatility target. I call this the instrument value volatility.
The instrument currency volatility needs to be converted to an instrument value volatility
using an appropriate exchange rate. The exchange rate will have the currency of the
instrument as the numerator, and the account value currency as the denominator.
As an example for a UK investor with a GBP account, the instrument currency volatility
of a crude oil future ($997.50) will need to be multiplied by the current USD/GBP
exchange rate, to work out what those dollars are worth in British pounds. As I write this
paragraph the USD/GBP rate is 0.67, giving an instrument value volatility of $997.50 ×
0.67 = £668.325. Again you shouldn’t round any numbers yet. Note I’m using USD/GBP,
rather than GBP/USD which is normally quoted. Be sure you are using the correct rate.


Volatility target and position risk
Now let’s relate this back to your cash volatility target – the risk you require and are
comfortable with from your trading account. From the previous chapter on volatility
targeting (page 137) your daily cash volatility target is your long-term expected daily
standard deviation of returns, measured in the currency of your trading capital.



158
                                                                             Chapter Ten. Position Sizing


Let’s refer back to the example I opened the chapter with. We had an investor with a
£1,000,000 annualised cash target volatility, implying a daily target of one-sixteenth of
that, £62,500.114 I worked out above that the crude oil future had an instrument value
volatility of £668.325 for a UK investor. This is the daily risk of owning one instrument
block – a single futures contract. How many of these blocks of crude oil should this
investor hold?
For now let’s assume we are putting together a trading subsystem for the investor; a
trading system which only has a single instrument. We’ll be achieving the entire cash
volatility target by having positions in just one instrument; in this case crude oil. This
assumption will be relaxed in the next chapter, when we look at creating a portfolio of
subsystems.
We also assume that we get the required target risk by having a constant amount of
expected volatility from owning a fixed long position in the asset. So we won’t worry
yet about the value of any forecast for the instrument. I’ll consider forecasts in the next
section of this chapter.
For the investor in the example to get the entire required daily standard deviation of
£62,500 from being long crude oil futures they need to buy £62,500, divided by the risk
of one contract, £668.325, or 93.52 contracts. The value of 93.52 is a scaling factor which
accounts for the difference between an instrument’s natural volatility and the required
volatility of the portfolio. I call it the volatility scalar.
In general the volatility scalar is equal to your daily cash volatility target, divided by
the instrument value volatility. You’ll notice that both of these variables are in the same
currency as your trading capital. Also please note that you should not round the volatility
scalar to a whole number.


From forecast to position
I’ve shown that the investor in the simple example for this chapter would need to own
a long position in 93.52 crude oil futures (the volatility scalar) to realise their desired
volatility target. This however ignores any forecast that the investor has made; either a
combined forecast from multiple trading rules, or the single forecasts made by asset
allocating investors and semi-automatic traders. At the start of the chapter I’d assumed
that the forecast is -6 in the example. Clearly the investor is going to want to be short,
rather than long, but by how much?
To work this out you need to think about average forecasts. Over a long period of time
you’ll still want to be hitting your volatility target for returns, no matter what your daily
forecasts are. In chapter seven (page 112) I recommended that forecasts should have a

114. Remember to go from annual to daily volatility you divide by the ‘square root of time’. As there are
roughly 256 business days in a year, the appropriate divisor is 16.

                                                                                                     159
Systematic Trading



long run average absolute value of 10. This implies that to hit your target over the long
run you’d want your positions to have the same average expected variation as if you had
a constant forecast of +10.
Effectively then the volatility scalar gives you a position which is consistent with having a
constant forecast of +10. If you’re currently more optimistic with a larger positive forecast
you should buy more blocks; and if you’re pessimistic you should have fewer blocks, or go
short if the forecast is negative.
In the example above I calculated a volatility scalar of 93.52 crude oil futures contracts.
This will be consistent with the long run forecast, so a forecast of +10 equates to buying
93.52 contracts (ignoring for the moment that you can’t hold fractional contracts). If the
forecast falls to +5 you’d only be half as confident, and want half the original position,
46.76 contracts. A forecast of -20 would mean you’d want to go short twice the original
position, a sell of 187.04 blocks.
The resulting quantity of blocks is the subsystem position. It’s a subsystem position
because, as I said earlier, we’re assuming in this chapter your entire capital is invested in
a subsystem trading one instrument, rather than in a complete trading system running
across a number of instruments.
A subsystem position is equal to the volatility scalar multiplied by the forecast, then
divided by the long average of 10. So for the crude oil example with a forecast of -6, and
where I’ve worked out the volatility scalar to be 93.52, the subsystem position will be
(93.52 × -6) ÷ 10 = -56.11, implying a short of 56.11 contracts. Again you shouldn’t do
any rounding of non integer positions for now.
If you’re an asset allocating investor you’ve probably spotted that with a constant forecast
which is always equal to +10 (from the single ‘no-rule’ rule), your position will always be
equal to the volatility scalar.
For other traders and investors your position will depend on your forecast and on the
components of the volatility scalar (your cash volatility target for your portfolio and the
account value volatility of the instrument). Higher absolute forecasts, bigger account
sizes, a greater appetite for risk and lower instrument price volatility will mean larger
positions; and vice versa.




160
                                                                           Chapter Ten. Position Sizing


Summary for position sizing


 Instrument        Staunch systems traders: This is the combined forecast calculated in
 forecast          chapter eight by weighting your trading rule forecasts for an instrument
                   and accounting for the forecast diversification multiplier.
                   Asset allocating investors: Equal to a constant value of +10.
                   Semi-automatic traders: Single discretionary forecast.
                   All groups will end up with one forecast per instrument. It will have an
                   expected average absolute value of 10 and it is limited to a range of -20 to
                   +20.

 Annualised        This is the percentage volatility target multiplied by the trading capital,
 cash volatility   from chapter nine. It’s an annualised measure of expected risk from your
 target            portfolio.
                   It will be in units of the currency your trading capital is in.

 Daily cash        Annualised cash volatility target divided by ‘the square root of time’; with
 volatility        approximately 256 business days in a year you should divide by 16.
 target

 Price             Expected daily standard deviation of instrument price changes. Watch out
 volatility        for very low standard deviations.
                   It will be in units of percentage of price.

 Instrument        This is the size you trade instruments in. For equities this would usually
 block             be one share, though 100 shares might make sense if trading fewer is
                   uneconomic. For futures this will be a single contract and for spread bets it
                   is the minimum bet per point.

 Block value       This is how much each 1% change in the price of a block translates into
                   monetary value.
                   It will be in units of instrument currency, i.e. $ for US equities.

 Instrument        This is the daily standard deviation of instrument value. Equal to block value
 currency          multiplied by the price volatility. It will be in units of instrument currency.
 volatility

 Exchange          This is the exchange rate between instrument currency (numerator) and the
 rate              currency your trading capital is in (denominator).

 Instrument        Daily standard deviation of instrument value, measured in your trading
 value             capital currency. Equal to instrument currency volatility multiplied by the
 volatility        exchange rate.
                   It will be in units of your account currency.



                                                                                                   161
Systematic Trading



 Volatility          Number of position units to hold if you are investing your entire trading
 scalar              capital in one instrument, ignoring forecasts. Equal to daily cash volatility
                     target divided by the instrument value volatility, both in your currency.
                     It’s in units of position blocks.

 Subsystem           How many blocks do you need to hold given your forecast? Equal to the
 position            instrument forecast, multiplied by volatility scalar, divided by 10.
                     This is in units of position blocks.




Worked example for position sizing
From the start of the chapter the investor in this example has an annualised £1,000,000
volatility target and is investing in WTI Crude oil futures contracts, with a forecast of -6.


 Instrument          -6
 forecast

 Annualised          £1,000,000
 cash volatility
 target

 Daily cash          Annualised cash volatility target divided by 16: £62,500
 volatility
 target

 Price               For crude oil the bottom panel of figure 23 shows average returns of $1 a
 volatility          day, which with a price of $75 equates to 1.33%.

 Instrument          One futures contract
 block

 Block value         For a WTI Crude contract of 1000 barrels with price $75 a 1% price move will
                     equate to $0.75 × 1000 = $750.

 Instrument          This is the block value multiplied by the price volatility.
 currency
                     For crude this is $750 × 1.33 = $997.50
 volatility

 Exchange            Numerator is instrument currency, USD. Denominator is account value
 rate                currency, GBP. The USD/GBP exchange rate is currently around 0.67.

 Instrument          This is the instrument currency volatility multiplied by the exchange rate.
 value
                     $997.50 × 0.67 = £668.325
 volatility




162
                                                                        Chapter Ten. Position Sizing



 Volatility       Daily cash volatility target divided by the instrument value volatility, both in
 scalar           the investor’s currency.
                  £62,500 divided by £668.325 equals 93.52 contracts.

 Subsystem        Final combined instrument forecast, multiplied by volatility scalar, then
 position         divided by 10.
                  (-6 × 93.52) ÷ 10 = short 56.11 contracts (no rounding).




You can now answer all of Sergei’s questions and you’ve finally got positions for a trading
system that has a single instrument, the subsystem position. But any good trading system
will have multiple assets and even semi-automatic traders normally have more than one
bet on the table at a time. The next chapter examines how you can put several subsystems
together into a portfolio.




                                                                                                163
Chapter Eleven. Portfolios
                                                      Instruments

 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X

                                                                                                                    Portfolio
                                                Combined                               Subsystem                    weighted
 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for                                                     position in X
 variation 2       instrument X                 forecast X                                                          position in X


                                                                                                       weights
                                     weights                   targeting    sizing
 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X



                                                               Volatility   Position                   Instrument
 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast,

                                     Forecast
 variation 1       instrument Y


 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for              Combined                                                            Portfolio
                                                                                       Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2       instrument Y                 forecast Y                             position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument Y

                                          Customising for speed and size




Q   UESTION: WHAT DO MANY TRADERS AND AMATEUR INVESTORS
    who buy individual equities rather than invest in collective funds have in common?
Answer: They both tend to have too few assets in their portfolios.
Research into individual investors finds many hold less than five shares, whilst traders
often only prefer to deal with one or two markets where they feel most expert. So far
I haven’t helped solve this problem, since in the last chapter I showed you how to put
together a trading subsystem which holds positions in just a single instrument.
But diversification really is the only free lunch in investment. Allocating across different
asset classes can easily double your expected Sharpe ratio, as we saw in chapter two
(page 46). It’s best to simultaneously run a portfolio of as many trading subsystems
and instruments as possible and allocate your trading capital between them. To allocate

                                                                                                                                    165
Systematic Trading



within this portfolio you will use instrument weights. Even though semi-automatic
traders don’t have a fixed set of assets they should also try and hold a number of positions
in several instruments at once.


Chapter overview

 Portfolios and instrument     What is a portfolio of trading subsystems and what are
 weights                       instrument weights?

 Instrument weights –          How to allocate weights when you are trading a fixed set of
 Asset allocators and          trading subsystems.
 Staunch systems traders

 Instrument weights –          The special case of semi-automatic traders who have multiple
 Semi-automatic traders        bets on, but not necessarily in the same instruments.

 Instrument diversification    Accounting for diversification between subsystems for different
 multiplier                    instruments.

 A portfolio of positions      Calculating what position you should hold, given your
 and trades                    instrument weights, and what trades you should generate.




Portfolios and instrument weights

This section is suitable for all readers

In an earlier chapter I used an example of a three asset portfolio to illustrate the black art
of portfolio optimisation. The three assets were the S&P 500, NASDAQ and a 20 year
US Bond. Suppose now that you’re asset allocator investors who are trying to allocate
capital between these instruments, or staunch systems traders who have forecasting
rules that predict their returns. Alternatively, imagine that you’re a semi-automatic
trader who happens to have placed bets on each of these three assets.
Using the methods in the previous chapter you would calculate three subsystem positions,
one for each instrument. Each position will depend on your forecast and how risky each
instrument is. You would also have pretended to put all of your trading capital into
trading each one of these systems. Effectively you will create three trading subsystems,
each of which nominally uses your entire capital to trade one instrument.



166
                                                                                   Chapter Eleven. Portfolios


In practice though you’re going to share your capital across a portfolio of subsystems;
similar to the way I created a portfolio with the same three underlying assets in chapter
four. Each instrument’s trading subsystem will get a positive instrument weight, with
weights summing to 100%. Your portfolio weighted position will be the instrument’s
subsystem position, multiplied by the relevant instrument weight to reflect its portfolio
share. Once you have this you can work out what trades are needed for each instrument.
As I’ll show you later in the chapter you also need to account for the effect of portfolio
diversification. But first we need to consider how to calculate the instrument weights.


Instrument weights – asset allocators and systems traders

Asset Allocating Investor

Staunch Systems Trader

Asset allocating investors run a fixed portfolio of trading subsystems, one per
instrument, each consisting of a single trading rule – the ‘no-rule’ rule producing a
constant identical forecast. Staunch systems traders have a group of trading rules whose
forecasts are combined and then scaled into a position. In both cases you are allocating
your trading capital between subsystems relating to a fixed set of instruments. This is
different to traditional portfolio allocation, where you allocate capital directly to positions
in each instrument.
Because of your hard work in the last couple of chapters all the subsystems will be volatility
standardised and have the same expected standard deviation of returns. As you saw in
chapter four, this makes the job of portfolio optimisation simpler. You can easily use the
handcrafting method introduced in chapter four to determine the instrument weight
each subsystem gets. It’s also possible to use bootstrapping as an alternative.115
To handcraft your weights you need to group the assets and for this you need correlations.
There are two alternatives that can be used to find these. Firstly you can estimate them
using back-tested data. Alternatively if you don’t have back-tested correlations then tables
50 to 55 (from page 291 in appendix C) give indicative correlations between instrument
returns.
But you need the correlations between trading subsystem returns, not the returns of the
underlying instruments. For dynamic trading systems the correlations between subsystem
returns tend to be lower than those of the underlying instruments. A good approximation
is that the correlation between subsystem returns will be 0.70 of the correlation of
115. To use bootstrapping you need to be able to back-test the performance of each of the trading
subsystems separately. Ideally this should be done on a rolling out of sample basis. As I’ll discuss in chapter
twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, any returns that are calculated should be after costs.

                                                                                                           167
Systematic Trading



instrument returns. So if two assets have a correlation of 0.5 between their instrument
returns in appendix C, then their subsystems will have a correlation of 0.7 × 0.5 = 0.35.
Because asset allocating investors use a static strategy, the correlation of your subsystems
is likely to be much closer to what you’d have with fixed long positions in the underlying
instruments. So rather than multiplying the correlations in appendix C by 0.7, I
recommend that you use them without adjustment.
In chapter four I showed you how to change portfolio weights if you had evidence that
assets had different Sharpe ratios. But I wouldn’t recommend adjusting instrument
weights for Sharpe ratios, since there’s rarely enough evidence of different performance
between subsystems for different instruments, even once we account for different levels of
costs. I come back to this in the chapter on ‘Speed and Size’.
Let’s look at an example. Here’s how I would handcraft the instrument weights for the
simple example of three instruments (S&P 500, NASDAQ, 20 year bond). Row numbers
refer to the relevant rows of table 8 (page 79).


 First level grouping        Group one (bonds): One asset, so 100% in 20 year bond. Row 1.
 Within asset classes        Group two (equities): Two assets, 50% in each. Row 2.

 Second level grouping       I have two groups to allocate to, each gets 50%. Row 2.
 Across asset classes




This gives me the same weights I had in chapter four for the actual assets, as shown in
table 28. Of course this wouldn’t normally be the case; it’s only because this is a trivial
example with no more than two assets in each group, and the same groupings as before.


TABLE 28: IN THIS SIMPLE EXAMPLE HANDCRAFTED WEIGHTS FOR TRADING SUBSYSTEMS
ARE THE SAME AS FOR THE ASSETS THEMSELVES

                              Handcrafted
                                weight

 US 20 year bond                  50%

 S&P 500 equities                 25%

 NASDAQ equities                  25%


I give more complex examples of handcrafting instrument weights in each of the example
chapters in part four.

168
                                                                    Chapter Eleven. Portfolios


Instrument weights – semi-automatic trading

Semi-automatic Trader

Semi-automatic traders don’t have fixed portfolios of instruments, always creating
forecasts and holding positions in each and every instrument. Instead you’re likely to
have a relatively small number of opportunistic positions (bets) on your books at any
one time, drawn from a larger pool of potential trading ideas. Each time you enter a new
bet for a different instrument you need to make a forecast, and then size your positions
according to the size of your account and the risk of the instrument.
This presents a problem because the make-up of your portfolio, and hence the correlation
of returns, will change over time as different instruments come in and out. The simplest
thing to do is to allocate trading capital equally between potential opportunities. To
ensure your risk is properly controlled you must also limit the maximum number of bets
that can be placed at any time.
So you should allocate your risk equally between a notional maximum number of
concurrent bets, each of which represents a potential trading subsystem. For example if
the notional maximum number is ten bets this implies each instrument weight will be
100% divided by 10, which equals 10% for each instrument.
For reasons that will become clear later in this chapter, I recommend that this maximum
shouldn’t be more than 2.5 times the average number of bets you expect to be holding
over time.


Instrument diversification multiplier
Once you’ve parcelled out your trading capital to each trading subsystem you’re
faced with a problem you might have seen before in chapter seven, which is the issue of
diversification reducing your risk. If you skipped that chapter please go back and read the
concept box on page 129. Diversified portfolios of volatility standardised assets like
trading subsystems nearly always have a lower expected standard deviation of returns
than the individual assets they are trading. The lower the average correlation, the worse
the undershooting of risk will be.
You already know that the correlation between the two equity indices and the bond in
the simple example is very low (the rule of thumb value from table 50 in appendix C is
0.1, and the estimated value I calculated in chapter four was negative). The correlation
between the subsystem returns is likely to be even lower. So it’s very unlikely that you’ll
get the same desired level of average risk from a portfolio of these three instrument
subsystems as you would if you ran each one individually.


                                                                                          169
Systematic Trading



As in chapter seven you’re going to need to apply a factor to account for the diversification
in your portfolio: an instrument diversification multiplier. You multiply the portfolio
weighted positions you’ve calculated by this multiplier to ensure that the overall portfolio
has the right level of expected risk.


Staunch Systems Trader

Asset Allocating Investor

Asset allocating investors and staunch systems traders should use the correlations
between the returns of each instrument trading subsystem to calculate the expected
degree of diversification in the portfolio.
You have the option of either using estimated correlations from a back-test, or using rule
of thumb correlations.116 Once again be warned that tables 50 to 55 (from page 291 in
appendix C) give indicative correlations between instrument returns. Staunch systems
traders can multiply these by 0.7 to give the correlation between trading subsystem
returns. Asset allocating investors should use instrument return correlations without
adjustment.
Once you have the correlations, from whichever source, you have two options for the
calculation: either use the formula in appendix D on page 297, or the approximations in
table 18 (page 131). The number of assets in table 18 will be the number of subsystems
you are running.
Let’s return to the simple three asset example. From table 50 the correlation between bonds
and equities is 0.1, and from table 54 the correlation between the S&P 500 and NASDAQ
is around 0.75.117 I’ll assume for the sake of the example that I have a dynamic trading
system, so I’m not a static asset allocator. This implies I should multiply correlations by
0.7, giving the correlation matrix in table 29. The average correlation is around 0.25, and
from table 18 with three assets I get a diversification multiplier of 1.41.118
It’s possible to get very high values for the diversification multiplier, if you have enough
assets, and they are relatively uncorrelated. However in a crisis such as the 2008 crash,
correlations tend to jump higher exposing us to serious losses – an example of unpredictable
risk. To avoid the serious dangers this poses I strongly recommend limiting the value of
the multiplier to an absolute maximum of 2.5.



116. Any negative correlations you estimate should be floored at zero to avoid an excessively large multiplier.
117. Actually table 54 in appendix C tells us the correlation between equities of different industries.
Given the technology heavy nature of the NASDAQ compared to the S&P 500 this seems a good enough
approximation, and is very close to the real number which we estimated in chapter four.
118. You should remove the self correlation values of 1.0 before calculating the average.

170
                                                                                    Chapter Eleven. Portfolios


TABLE 29: CORRELATION MATRIX OF TRADING SUBSYSTEMS FOR THREE EXAMPLE ASSETS

                                    Bond              S&P            NASDAQ

  US 20 year bond                     1

  S&P 500                           0.07                1

  NASDAQ                            0.07              0.53               1


Correlations are 0.7 of the indicative correlations of instrument returns from tables 50 and
54 in appendix C.




Semi-automatic Trader

For semi-automatic traders I recommend using the following simple calculation. The
instrument diversification multiplier should be your maximum numbers of bets divided
by the average number of bets.119 So if you had an average of four bets on at any given
time, with a maximum of five, then your multiplier would be 5 ÷ 4 = 1.25.
I advocate that the multiplier is limited to a maximum of 2.5, since if you end up
frequently trading more than your average then your expected risk will be too high. As I
said earlier this means it’s advisable that the maximum number of bets isn’t more than 2.5
times the expected average.


A portfolio of positions and trades

This section is relevant to all readers

You’re now in a position to see how a complete trading system for the simple three asset
example could work.
I’m assuming that I use futures to trade these assets and that I have an annualised cash
volatility target of €100,000. The price volatility and exchange rates are correct as I

119. This essentially assumes that all of a semi-automatic trader’s bets are always perfectly correlated, which
is very conservative. Here is the proof of this result. Suppose you’re aiming for a daily volatility target of
$1,000 and have an average of five bets, with a maximum of 10. All portfolio weights are 100% ÷ 10 = 10%.
Each trading subsystem will also have a volatility target of $1,000. Once multiplied by the portfolio weight
each subsystem position will have an average volatility of $100. On average with five bets, all of which are
perfectly correlated, your daily portfolio returns will be 5 × $100 = $500 (note had they all been uncorrelated
the risk would only be $223). So to hit the overall target of $1,000 you need a diversification multiplier of 2.

                                                                                                            171
Systematic Trading



write, but I’ve used some arbitrary forecasts to make this example interesting but not too
specific. You’ll see some more specific examples in part four.
First of all tables 30 and 31 are there to remind you of the calculations in earlier chapters
for each of the three trading subsystems.


TABLE 30: CALCULATING THE INSTRUMENT VALUE VOLATILITY FOR THE THREE ASSETS IN THE
EXAMPLE PORTFOLIO

                               (A)            (B)             (C)             (D)              (E)
                              Price          Block        Instrument       Exchange        Instrument
                            volatility       value         currency          rate             value
                            % per day                      volatility      USD/EUR          volatility
                                                             A×B                              C×D

  US 20 year bond              0.52         $1500            $780             0.88            €686

  S&P 500 equities             0.84          $1145           $956             0.88             €841

  NASDAQ equities              0.87          $880            $766             0.88             €674


Values in table assume we’re using futures and assuming a Euro investor. Figures correct
as of January 2015.


TABLE 31: CALCULATING THE SUBSYSTEM POSITION FOR THE THREE TRADING SUBSYSTEMS IN
THE EXAMPLE PORTFOLIO

                               (F)             (G)           (H)                (J)             (K)
                           Instrument         Daily        Volatility       Combined        Subsystem
                              value           cash          scalar           forecast        position
                            volatility      volatility      G÷F                              (H × J) ÷
                                             target                                              10

  US 20 year bond             €686           €6,250            9.11             10              9.11

  S&P 500 equities            €841           €6,250           7.43              -10            -7.43

  NASDAQ equities             €674           €6,250           9.28              -15             -13.9


The investor has a €100,000 cash volatility target, which implies a €6,250 daily target.120
Forecasts are arbitrary.


120. To go from annualised to daily we divide by the ‘square root of time’, assuming a 256 day business day
year that means you should divide by 16.

172
                                                                      Chapter Eleven. Portfolios


The subsystem positions in column K assume one instrument is traded with the
entire trading capital. In table 32 I bring in the instrument weights and instrument
diversification multiplier that I calculated earlier in this chapter. So to get the final
portfolio instrument position I just need to multiply each subsystem position by the
relevant instrument weight and the multiplier which compensates for the diversification
in the portfolio.


TABLE 32: CALCULATING THE PORTFOLIO INSTRUMENT POSITION FOR THE EXAMPLE
PORTFOLIO

                          (K)             (L)             (M)                  (N)
                       Subsystem      Instrument      Instrument      Portfolio instrument
                        position        weight      diversification         position
                                                       multiplier          K×L×M

 US 20 year bond           9.11          50%             1.41                  6.42

 S&P 500 equities         -7.43          25%             1.41                  -2.62

 NASDAQ equities          -13.9          25%             1.41                  -4.91


The table is using the instrument weights and diversification multiplier derived earlier in
the chapter.


The final table 33 shows how I generate actual trades. To begin with I round the instrument
position to get a rounded target position. This is the first time that I’ve rounded in my
calculations. I then compare this to the current position which I already have. If I’d only
just started trading this will be zero, but column P shows some arbitrary current positions
to demonstrate the logic.
Finally I can calculate the size of any trade needed. I recommend that if the current
position is within 10% of the rounded target position, then you shouldn’t trade. I call
this position inertia.
So for example if I had a target position of 50 crude oil contracts and my current position
was between 45 and 55 contracts then I wouldn’t bother trading. Conversely if the current
position was 42 contracts versus a target of 50, I’d buy 8 contracts to hit my target. In the
table the positions are relatively small so position inertia isn’t used.




                                                                                            173
Systematic Trading



TABLE 33: CALCULATING THE REQUIRED TRADE GIVEN THE ROUNDED TARGET POSITIONS
AND SOME ARBITRARY CURRENT POSITIONS

                                  (N)                 (P)                (Q)               (R)
                               Portfolio           Rounded             Current            Trade
                              instrument        target position        position
                                position          Round (N)                                P-Q

  US 20 year bond                6.42                   6                  4              Buy 2

  S&P 500 equities               -2.62                 -3                  -2              Sell 1

  NASDAQ equities                -4.91                 -5                  -5             None




      CONCEPT: POSITION INERTIA
      Position inertia is a way of avoiding small frequent trades that increase costs
      without earning additional returns.
      For example suppose your desired unrounded position is 133.48 Italian government
      bond futures, which is 133 contracts rounded. If your desired position goes to
      133.52, 134 rounded, you’d buy one contract. If it drops back to 133.48 you
      would sell again. But the changes in desired position were only 0.04. Is it worth
      buying and selling, paying two lots of commission and market spreads, for such a
      small adjustment? Probably not.
      The solution is to avoid trading until the target position is more than 10% away
      from the current position. For Italian bond futures the first movement in the
      desired position to 133.52 wouldn’t result in a trade, since your current position of
      133 would only be 0.75% away from the desired rounded position of 134. In fact
      the target position would have to go to 147 blocks before you traded.
      Position inertia significantly reduces trading costs, which as you’ll see in the next
      chapter can seriously affect your returns. My research shows position inertia usually
      has a negligible effect on pre-cost performance, so there is no downside to using
      it.121




121. This seems to be true for trading rules with holding periods of greater than a few days. If you’re trading
faster you probably shouldn’t use position inertia (or use a lower value than 10%), but as we’ll see in chapter
twelve it’s very hard to trade that quickly and make money.

174
                                                                         Chapter Eleven. Portfolios


Trades can be done manually or by an algorithm if you have a completely automated
system. There is information on how I automate my own trading with simple algorithms
on my website (see appendix A).


Summary for creating a portfolio of trading subsystems

 Subsystem         This is the number of instrument blocks you hold in each trading
 position          subsystem, given your forecasts, the instrument riskiness and your daily
                   cash volatility target, as calculated in chapter ten.
                   It is in instrument blocks.

 Instrument        Each trading subsystem should have an instrument weight. Weights
 weights           should add up 100%.
                   Staunch systems traders and asset allocating investors can use
                   handcrafting or bootstrapping to find weights. Correlations can be
                   estimated from a back-test of trading subsystems, or using rules of thumb.
                   In the latter case you should multiply instrument return correlations from
                   appendix C by 0.7 if you’re trading a dynamic strategy, or by 1.0 if you’re
                   asset allocating investors using fixed constant forecasts.
                   Semi-automatic traders should use equal instrument weights of 100%
                   divided by the maximum number of possible bets.

 Instrument        For asset allocating investors and staunch systems traders this is calculated
 diversification   using the correlation of trading subsystem returns. The multiplier can be
 multiplier        calculated precisely using the formula in appendix C on page 297 or
                   approximately using table 18 on page 131.
                   For semi-automatic traders this will be equal to the maximum number of
                   bets divided by the average number of bets.
                   I recommend that in all cases the multiplier is limited to a maximum value
                   of 2.5.

 Portfolio         Equal to instrument subsystem position multiplied by instrument weight
 instrument        and then by instrument diversification multiplier.
 position

 Rounded           This is the portfolio instrument position rounded to the nearest integer
 target position   number of instrument blocks.

 Desired trade     After calculating the rounded target position you compare this to your
                   actual current position and generate the necessary trade. If the current
                   position is within 10% of the target then you don’t need to trade (position
                   inertia).




                                                                                               175
Systematic Trading



This completes the main part of the framework. I’ve now shown you how to create a
complete trading system, consisting of a portfolio of trading subsystems. In the next
chapter we will consider how to design systems which cope with the varying costs you’d
see trading at different speeds, and with larger or smaller amounts of capital.




176
Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size
                                                      Instruments

 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X

                                                                                                                    Portfolio
                                                Combined                               Subsystem                    weighted
 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for                                                     position in X
 variation 2       instrument X                 forecast X                                                          position in X


                                     weights                   targeting    sizing
                                                                                                       weights
 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument X



                                                               Volatility                              Instrument
                                                                            Position
 Trading rule A,   A1 forecast,

                                     Forecast
 variation 1       instrument Y


 Trading rule A,   A2 forecast for              Combined                                                            Portfolio
                                                                                       Subsystem                    weighted
 variation 2       instrument Y                 forecast Y                             position in Y                position in Y

 Trading rule B,   B1 forecast for
 variation 1       instrument Y

                                          Customising for speed and size




S  O FAR EVERYTHING YOU’VE SEEN IN THE FRAMEWORK IS EQUALLY
   relevant to a nimble amateur trader, holding 100 share positions for a few hours,
and the portfolio manager of a massive hedge fund, following trends lasting for months.
However in practice these two people will need to trade quite differently to account for
the frequency and size of their trades.
In this chapter I will look at how you should design your trading systems given these two
interrelated issues of speed and account size.




                                                                                                                                    177
Systematic Trading



Chapter overview

  Speed of trading               The thorny question of how quickly you should trade given the
                                 costs of doing so.

  Decomposing and                How to work out what you expect to pay in costs, given which
  calculating the cost of        instruments you are trading and the characteristics of your
  trading                        trading system.

  Using trading costs to         Once you know your costs, how you should adjust your system
  make design decisions          to cope.

  Trading with more or           The issues of trading with relatively small or large amounts of
  less capital                   capital.

  Determining overall            Having a smaller account of capital limits how many instruments
  portfolio size                 you can trade. I’ll explain how best to determine the size and
                                 shape of your portfolio.




Speed of trading
How fast should you trade? If you go long USD/EUR FX at 11:05am on Tuesday 23
September 2014, should you expect to be selling at 11:06? Or by Thursday? Perhaps you
will be holding on until December, or even March the following year?
The answer to this question depends on two things: how you expect prices to behave and
the cost of each trade. Suppose you have a crystal ball and know with certainty that prices
will increase by 10 cents in the next week. If it costs you 1 cent to trade then you should
buy as you’ll definitely make 8 cents by next Tuesday.122
Unfortunately crystal balls are in short supply. Instead we have forecasts which don’t
provide certainty, but hopefully shift the odds in our favour. You might have a trading
rule where after looking at the back-test you expect to get a Sharpe ratio (SR) of 1.5
before costs. But this strategy pays out two-thirds of its profits in trading costs, so the
after-cost SR is just 0.5. If you were running at a 20% volatility target you’d be expecting
pre-cost returns of 30% a year, annual costs of 20% and net returns of just 10%.123 Is it
wise to trade this rule?



122. 10 cents raw profit, less 1 cent to buy in and 1 cent to sell out.
123. Annual returns are the expected annualised standard deviation of percentage returns (percentage
volatility target) multiplied by Sharpe ratio. For pre-cost returns 20% × 1.5 = 30%. For after cost returns
20% × 0.5 = 10%. Hence you must be paying 30% - 10% = 20% in costs.

178
                                                                Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


Personally I think it is very unwise indeed. If the actual pre-cost SR turned out to be less
than 1.0, giving raw returns below 20% a year, then the strategy will lose money after
costs. You’d be trading far too quickly relative to the available pre-cost performance.
Overtrading is a result of overconfidence, one of the cognitive biases I discussed in
chapter one. Only someone who was very bullish would assume the realised pre-cost SR
would definitely be 1.0 or over in actual trading. You shouldn’t trade systems like this and
hope for the best. Instead it’s much better to design trading systems that aren’t vulnerable
to such high levels of costs.
In the next part of the chapter I’m going to show you how to calculate the cost of trading
a particular instrument at a given speed, and how to work out the likely costs you’ll face.
Then you’ll see how to construct trading systems to ensure you won’t be making more
money for brokers and market makers, than for yourself.


Calculating the cost of trading

The cost of execution
The first kind of cost we’ll analyse is execution cost. Back-tests nearly always assume that
when executing a trade you will pay the mid-price. But in practice the difference between
the mid and the price you achieve will depend on how large your trades are compared to
the available volume. This difference is the execution cost. Look at figure 24, which shows
a snapshot of the order book for the Euro Stoxx European equity index future. At this
point the mid-price was halfway between the bid of 3,369 and the offer of 3,370; equal
to 3,369.5.
Smaller traders can assume they will pay at most half the usual spread between bid and
offer in execution cost, which is what you get from submitting a market order that crosses
the spread and hits the best bid or offer. If you’re selling 437 contracts or fewer then the
price you’d receive is 3,369. Similarly if you’re buying fewer than 8 contracts the most
you would pay is 3,370. In this example the expected execution cost is 0.5 of a point (half
of the one point spread between 3369 and 3370). If you placed limit orders you might
do better, but it’s better to be conservative and assume costs are higher than you’d hope.
This assumption is reasonable if your typical trade is less than the usual size available on
the inside of the spread. Larger traders cannot assume this, and I discuss this further in
the final part of this chapter. Also remember that this is not a book about high frequency
trading. These assumptions are wrong if you are constantly submitting orders every
few seconds or fractions of a second, as the order book will be affected by each of your
successive trades.




                                                                                          179
Systematic Trading



FIGURE 24: ORDER BOOK FOR EURO STOXX INDEX MARCH 2015 FUTURES, AS OF 23 JANUARY
2015 11:13 GMT


  Product                                                 Product ID

  Euro Stoxx 50 Index Futures                             FESX

  Avg. Pr.                      Cum. Qty.     Quantity                      Bid

  3,369.00                           437          437                  3,369.00

  3,368.43                          1,013         576                  3,368.00

  3,367.89                          1,633         620                  3,367.00

  3,367.32                         2,330          697                  3,366.00

  3,366.81                         2,988          658                  3,365.00

  3,366.30                         3,659           671                 3,364.00

  3,365.91                          4,144         485                  3,363.00

  3,365.37                          4,814         670                  3,362.00

  3,364.63                          5,797         983                  3,361.00

  3,364.07                          6,587         790                  3,360.00

                                 Contract         Last                  Volume

                                Mar 2015      3,368.00                 652,226

                     Ask        Quantity     Cum. Qty.                  Avg. Pr.

                3,370.00                7            7                 3,370.00

                3,371.00             540          577                  3,370.99

                3,372.00             1,147       1,724                 3,371.66

                3,373.00             696         2,420                 3,372.05

                3,374.00             647         3,067                 3,372.46

                3,375.00            1,017       4,084                  3,373.09

                3,376.00              831        4,915                 3,373.58

                3,377.00             502         5,417                 3,373.90

                3,378.00             1,131       6,548                  3,374.61

                3,379.00              571         7,119                3,374.96


Source: EUREX



180
                                                                               Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


Types of cost
The execution cost I calculated above is a key element of costs, but it’s not the only one.
There are also fees: commissions and taxes to pay. Here is a list of the types of cost you
might face.


  Expected            This is the execution cost you saw above; the difference between the mid-
  execution           price and what you get when you actually trade.
  cost per
                      Smaller traders can usually assume they will pay at most half the usual
  block
                      spread between bid and offer, as in the 0.5 points for Euro Stoxx in figure
                      24. As a percentage of 3,370 this will be 0.01484%.
                      To get the cost in cash terms multiply the percentage spread in price points
                      by the value of each 1%.* For Euro Stoxx futures at a price of 3,370 this
                      happens to be €337, so the execution cost is equal to 0.01484 multiplied by
                      3,370, which is €5.**

  Fee per             Many UK retail brokers impose a per trade commission regardless of the
  ticket              trade size. £5 to £15 is typical.

  Fee based           Other brokers charge per 100 shares or single futures contract traded. My
  on trade size       broker charges €3 per contract to trade Euro Stoxx futures.

  Percentage          Certain jurisdictions charge a percentage tax on the value of the trade,
  value fee           such as UK stamp duty at 0.5%. Some brokers also charge percentage
                      commissions on larger transactions; 0.1% is typical.



* Remember this was defined in chapter ten, ‘Position sizing’, page 154, as the block value, the amount we
make in cash terms when a price moves by 1%.
** For Euro Stoxx each one point move in the futures price costs €10. So a 1% move of 33.7 points is worth €337.



There may also be a holding cost for certain instruments. Futures, spread bets and
contracts for difference require rolling over monthly or quarterly. Nearly all collective
funds impose an annual charge. These holding costs are usually relatively small compared
to trading costs, and they don’t affect decisions about speed, so we’ll ignore them.124

Standardising cost measurement
Suppose it costs €8 in total to trade one Euro Stoxx futures contract (€5 in execution
costs and €3 in brokerage fees). Is this a lot? How does it compare with €5 to trade a
German 2 year bond Schatz futures contract? Naively, €5 sounds cheaper than €8, but the

124. There may also be interest payments, gains or losses on FX translation, data feeds, account management
fees, various business costs for professionals, and if you do well capital gains or income taxes. All these costs
should be taken into account when determining a trading system’s likely net profitability.

                                                                                                             181
Systematic Trading



answer is not as simple as you might expect. What if you have to buy 20 Schatz versus 10
Euro Stoxx to achieve the same amount of risk? (This is the volatility scalar from chapter
ten, page 159.) Despite Schatz looking like a bargain it’s going to cost you €100 versus
€80 to put equivalent positions on, so Euro Stoxx is actually cheaper to trade.
This is another opportunity to use the technique of volatility standardisation. You
should use a measure of costs that accounts for how risky different instruments are. The
measure is defined as follows: if you buy one instrument block and then sell it, how
much does that round trip cost when divided by the annualised risk of that instrument?
This standardised cost is equivalent to how much of your annualised raw Sharpe ratio
(SR) you’ll lose in costs for each round trip.
To calculate it you take the cost to trade one block in instrument currency C, and double it
because a round trip is two trades. You then divide by the annualised standard deviation
of the value of one block of an instrument. This is the annualised version of the daily
instrument currency volatility ICV (which was defined on page 158). Remember that
to annualise daily volatilities you need to multiply by 16.125 So the standardised cost will
be (2 × C) ÷ (16 × ICV).
An important implication of this formula is that the effective cost of trading is higher for
instruments with lower price volatility. This is another reason to exclude very low risk
instruments from your portfolio.
As I’m writing this, the price of the Euro Stoxx future has volatility of around 1.5% a day
(the instrument riskiness defined on page 155), and as each 1% move is worth €337
(the block value I discussed on page 154) this equates to a daily standard deviation
of the contract value of €506 (the ICV or instrument currency volatility). When I
annualise this I get 506 × 16 = €8,096. Given the cost of trading at €8 per block, this is a
standardised cost of 2 × €8 divided by €8,096, or 0.002 SR units.
Like most futures this is cheap to trade.126 Average standardised costs in 2014 for the
futures contracts I traded ranged from around 0.001 SR for the most liquid like the FTSE
100, up to around 0.03 SR for Australian interest rate futures.127
Now let’s look at a spread bet128 on the FTSE 100, where I am betting £1 per point. First
I need to work out the instrument currency volatility.




125. This is the usual ‘square root of time’ factor of 16, assuming a 256 business day year.
126. Staunch systems traders will use futures in the example in part four.
127. These are the conservative costs assuming you pay half the spread each time. In practice I paid a fraction
of this by using simple automated execution algorithms. Nevertheless, I still use the more conservative costs
when back-testing.
128. This is what semi-automatic traders will use in the example in part four.

182
                                                                               Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size



  Price volatility           Currently 0.75% a day.

  Instrument block           £1 per point.

  Block value                With the FTSE at 6600 a 1% move will be 66 points, the value of which
                             at £1 per point will be £66.

  Instrument                 This is the price volatility multiplied by the block value: 0.75 × £66 =
  currency volatility        £49.50.
  (ICV)




Now I can work out the costs.


  Expected                  Half the typical spread is 4 points, i.e. £4.* There are no fees or taxes.
  execution costs
  per block

  Total cost per            £4
  block (C)

  Instrument                From above £49.50.
  currency volatility
  (ICV)

  Cost in SR units          2 × C ÷ (16 × ICV) = 2 × £4 ÷ (16 × £49.50) = 0.01 SR



* This is for a quarterly forward bet – spreads on spot FTSE are tighter but with my typical holding period they
would end up being more expensive.



This is about ten times larger than for the FTSE 100 future, which isn’t surprising as the
spread bet is a retail product with a smaller block size.129 Generally bets on most major
indices come in around the 0.01 SR level, although those on individual shares will usually
cost more. I’ll use 0.01 SR as the benchmark cost for spread bets.
The third type of instrument we’ll consider is exchange traded funds (ETFs). Like many
equities, these are cheaper to trade in 100 share blocks. The precise cost will depend on
volatility, and the volatility for ETFs depends on the underlying assets and whether any
leverage is used. I will be conservative and check the cost of a relatively low volatility
instrument, the iShares IGIL global inflation linked bond ETF, which is one of the ETFs
I use in the asset allocator example in part four.

129. Spread bets generally have higher trading costs than futures, and are OTC traded rather than on
exchange. On the upside as well as smaller block sizes they offer tax free returns under current UK legislation.

                                                                                                            183
Systematic Trading



 Price volatility          Around 0.43% a day in early 2015.

 Instrument block          100 shares.

 Block value               100 shares at $144 per share is $14,400. 1% of this is $144.

 Instrument currency       This is the block value multiplied by the price volatility: $144 ×
 volatility                0.43 = $62




Now for the costs.


 Expected execution        The typical bid offer on this ETF is 70 cents wide or 0.486% of the
 cost per block            current price of $144.
                           The block value is $144. So if I pay half the spread I’d pay 0.486 ×
                           $144 × 0.5 = $35 for each block.

 Fee per ticket            My broker charges me $5.00 per trade. I assume there are no other
                           fees or taxes due.

 Total cost per            $35 + $5 = $40
 block (C)

 Instrument currency       $62 (from above).
 volatility (ICV)

 Cost in SR units          2 × C ÷ (16 × ICV) = 2 × $40 ÷ (16 × $62) = 0.08 SR




ETFs with higher price volatility, such as equities, will cost less than this on a risk
normalised basis, but to be safe I’ll use the figure of 0.08 SR as my expected cost for ETFs.
The costs in these examples are correct given current market conditions and the brokerage
fees I’m paying, but you should calculate your own figures before making any decisions.

Introducing turnover
What is the point in knowing it will cost us 0.08 Sharpe ratio (SR) units, 0.01 SR or
0.002 SR, to buy and sell a risk adjusted amount of each instrument? It’s pointless having
just a standardised measure of costs; you also need a standardised measure of how quickly
you’re trading. Since you know the cost per round trip in annualised SR units you’ll need
to count the number of round trips done annually, where a round trip is a buy and then
a sell.



184
                                                                    Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


I measured standardised costs by making them volatility standardised. Similarly each
buy and sell should be of a volatility standardised quantity of instrument blocks.
Because of the way the framework works, this is equivalent to your expected average
absolute position, or the position you’d have with an average sized forecast (defined as the
volatility scalar in chapter ten, page 159).
The number of round trips per year is the turnover. A turnover of 1 unit means you expect
to do one buy and one sell of an average sized position per year; so your average holding
period will be 12 months. Similarly a turnover of 52 units would imply you’re hanging
on to positions for an average of one week. Because turnover is volatility standardised it
means you can consider the trading pattern of each instrument in isolation (the so called
trading subsystem that was defined in chapter ten), without worrying about the rest of
your portfolio.
For example suppose it costs a standardised 0.01 Sharpe ratio units for each round trip in
spread bets, and your turnover is 10 units of average position each year. Then over a year
of ten round trips (ten buys and ten sells), you’d lose 10 × 0.01 = 0.10 SR in costs. That
means an SR of 0.5 would be reduced to 0.5 - 0.1 = 0.4.

Where does turnover come from?
Before continuing you also need to understand where turnover comes from. For what
reasons would you want to trade? Here’s a list, in order of descending importance.


 Forecast           A change in forecast from one or more of the trading rules used by staunch
                    systems traders, or because a semi-automatic trader is placing new bets
                    or closing old ones. This is the main source of position changes, except for
                    asset allocating investors for whom forecasts do not change.

 Instrument         Movements in the expected daily standard deviation of the value of each
 currency           instrument block (price volatility multiplied by block size). This is the
 volatility         second most important reason for position changes.

 Trading capital    Changes in the amount of capital you currently have at risk. This is
                    determined by your profits and losses and by any additional funds you
                    add or withdraw. Ignoring withdrawals and injections of money, with the
                    highest recommended 50% volatility target, this will change by an average
                    of 3% each day.
                    You can’t reduce the trades that result from this component, except by
                    using a lower percentage volatility target. So with a target of 16% it would
                    move by around 1% a day.

 Exchange rate      This is the exchange rate between an instrument’s currency and the
                    currency your current trading capital is in. Rates usually move by less than
                    1% a day in major currencies.
                    You can’t reduce these trades, which in any case are relatively small.


                                                                                              185
Systematic Trading



 System              These are parameters in the trading system which should only change
 parameters          infrequently if at all: Forecast weights, Instrument weights, forecast
                     and instrument diversification multipliers, and the percentage volatility
                     target.
                     You can eliminate the trades that result from this element by not meddling
                     with your system!




In the rest of this chapter I will focus on how forecasts and changes in price volatility
influence trading speed, since these can readily be adjusted and have the biggest effect.

Estimating the number of round trips
You can now calculate the expected costs of trading each instrument, given the units of
turnover of the trading system and the standardised costs. But how do you find the
turnover? There are three ways to estimate it.


 Sophisticated back-        If you have access to decent back-testing software, or can write
 test                       your own, then you can include a function that estimates turnover
                            directly.

 Simple back-test           More rudimentary back-testing tools can give you an estimate of
                            the average number of instrument blocks traded each year and
                            the average absolute number of blocks you held. You can then
                            calculate turnover as:
                            Average number of blocks traded per year ÷ (2 × average absolute
                            number of blocks held)

 Rule of thumb              The third alternative is to use rules of thumb. This approach is fine
                            for semi-automatic traders whose turnover will depend on the
                            tightness of their stop loss, asset allocating investors who don’t
                            get turnover from forecast changes, and for those staunch systems
                            traders who are using only the trading rules I provided in chapter
                            seven (the carry and EWMAC rules).
                            There will be relevant rules of thumb later in this chapter and in the
                            example chapters of part four.




186
                                                                       Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


Using trading costs to make design decisions

Setting a speed limit
Let’s return to the Euro Stoxx future, which had a standardised cost of 0.002 Sharpe
ratio (SR). Suppose you have a rule with a back-tested pre-cost return of 0.40 SR, and a
turnover of 50 round trips per year. You’d expect to pay 50 × 0.002 = 0.10 SR annually
in costs and receive 0.30 SR of net performance.
What if you had an alternative rule, with a turnover of 100, but with a pre-cost return
of 0.60 SR? Though your costs have doubled to 0.20 SR, the net return has increased to
0.40 SR. Surely you should choose the more expensive option?
In chapter three when I discussed fitting I pointed out that there is always considerable
uncertainty about expected pre-cost performance. An implication of that is you need a lot
of historical data to prove that a trading rule variation is likely to be profitable (as shown
in table 5 on page 62), let alone make enough money to cover its costs.
It also means you need a lot of data to make it probable that one trading rule had better
performance in the past than another. So considerable evidence is required to justify
trading a faster, and apparently superior, variation rather than a slower, cheaper and
supposedly inferior alternative (see table 6 on page 64).
The relative pre-cost Sharpe ratio you will achieve in practice is extremely uncertain,
whilst expected costs can be predicted with much more accuracy. There is one further
danger in blindly accepting the back-test results of expensive systems. What I’ve shown
you in this chapter is an estimate of current costs, which could be very different from what
they were 20 years ago. In many markets trading costs were much higher in the distant
past than they are now.
A fast trading rule might look great in the past, but if the market was very expensive
nobody could have actually exploited it. Now costs have fallen there is a good chance the
effect will vanish.
To ensure you don’t chase performance, or trade faster than was viable in the past, I
recommend that you set a speed limit; a maximum expected turnover you will allow your
systems to have.
At the start of this chapter I said I wouldn’t trade a strategy which paid two-thirds of its
profits out as costs, amounting to 1.0 in SR annually. I personally think it’s foolhardy
to pay more than a third of your expected profits in trading costs and I use that to set
my own speed limits. If you’re being realistic then the Sharpe ratio from trading each
instrument using its trading subsystem is unlikely to be higher than 0.4 on average.130



130. For more discussion on this refer back to chapter two, page 46.

                                                                                                 187
Systematic Trading



This implies you should never pay more than a third of 0.4, or 0.13 SR, in costs,
regardless of how good your back-test is. Remember that cost in SR terms is equal to the
standardised cost multiplied by the turnover in round trips per year. So dividing 0.13
by the standardised cost of an instrument will give you the turnover speed limit for that
instrument.
For a relatively cheap futures market like the Euro Stoxx this implies a maximum turnover
of 0.13 ÷ 0.002 = 65 round trips per year, or an average holding period of just under a
week. With the very cheapest instruments like NASDAQ futures you might be able to
double that turnover to give a holding period of a couple of days.
However this precludes day trading, which with two or more round trips per day would
be a turnover of at least 500 round trips each year. To trade that fast without spending
more than a third of your returns on costs you’d need to get a significantly higher pre-cost
Sharpe ratio, or reduce your standardised cost to around 0.13 ÷ 500 = 0.00025 SR units.
That level of costs is around a quarter of what the cheapest futures can achieve.
As it happens about a quarter of the standardised costs of these super cheap futures are
commissions of around $1 per contract, with the rest coming from execution costs. So to
day trade you’d need to get your execution costs down to zero, which means consistently
achieving the mid-price or better. To trade even faster, with three or more round trips a
day, you’d have to be getting consistently negative execution costs.
In conclusion then, to day trade even the cheapest instruments you will need to achieve
very high pre-cost Sharpe ratios, or have an execution strategy that consistently captures
the spread. This isn’t impossible, but clearly only those with a proven record of achieving
these goals should contemplate trading this quickly. This capability is relatively rare in
practice, which is why the vast majority of amateur day traders are unprofitable.
With a cost of 0.13 SR a year if you’re using the maximum suggested 50% volatility
target (as defined on page 137 in chapter nine), then you’ll be paying 0.13 × 50% =
6.5% a year in costs. This is a reasonably large drag on performance and personally I
wouldn’t want to see anything bigger.
As discretionary semi-automatic traders can’t use back-tests they need to avoid over-
confidence about their performance expectations. Rather than a maximum Sharpe ratio
(SR) of 0.40 on each instrument, you should conservatively expect to get at most 0.25
SR.131 This implies paying no more than a third of 0.25, or 0.08 SR in costs annually.
Asset allocating investors, whose static trading systems will have similar performance to
the underlying assets, should also use this lower figure.
You’re now ready to think about how you can customise your trading systems with an
understanding of costs. There are several areas in the framework where performance
expectations are used. These decisions should now be made using costs as well as expected
pre-cost performance.

131. Again refer back to chapter two, page 46.

188
                                                                  Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size



 Which instruments to trade        It’s going to be difficult to trade instruments with costs
                                   which are too high for the kind of system we want to use.

 Deciding average holding          Semi-automatic traders should use stop losses which
 period by setting stop losses     target a particular average holding period for positions.
 (semi-automatic traders)          When setting the level of these stops you need to consider
                                   the costs of your preferred instruments.

 Selecting, fitting and            If you decide to fit your trading rules then you must
 calibrating trading rules         consider both pre-cost Sharpe ratio and costs. Remember
 (staunch systems traders)         that you have more certainty of costs than of pre-cost
                                   performance.
                                   With my preferred method of fitting you shouldn’t look at
                                   pre-cost performance but should still exclude trading rule
                                   variations whose likely costs will be too high.

 Setting forecast weights          You need to use likely costs to avoid overweighting trading
 (staunch systems traders)         rule variations which perform well but are also relatively
                                   expensive to trade.

 Setting the risk percentage       When checking your Sharpe ratio to set the risk
                                   percentage, you should use after-cost performance.

 Setting the look-back for         After forecast changes this is the next key source of
 estimating price volatility       turnover in your trading systems. The costlier your trading
                                   is, the slower you should update your estimate of price
                                   volatility.

 Allocating instrument weights     You should consider giving less weight to more expensive
 (semi-automatic traders and       instruments, unless you think additional pre-cost
 asset allocating investors)       performance compensates you.




Which instruments to trade?
There are two routes to take when designing your trading systems so that they don’t
exceed any speed limits. Firstly you could decide what sort of speed you wish to trade at
and then choose instruments that are cheap enough to trade that quickly. Alternatively
if you have a preference for particular instruments then that will limit how fast you could
trade them. So for example if you can’t trade futures and prefer ETFs, then that will
heavily curtail your trading speed.
If you use my recommended maximum of 0.08 Sharpe ratio (SR) units paid annually
in costs for asset allocating investors and semi-automatic traders, then table 34 gives
the maximum possible standardised cost for a given holding period and turnover. It
also shows instruments which typically have that level of cost. You can then infer which


                                                                                            189
Systematic Trading



instruments to trade for a given speed of trading, or how quickly to trade given a preferred
set of instruments.
The table also shows the lower limit on how slowly you can trade a particular kind of
system, with a minimum achievable turnover in round trips per year. Given your limit on
what you’re willing to pay in costs, you can imply from this turnover which instruments
will be too expensive to trade at all.


TABLE 34: WHAT SPEEDS AND HOLDING PERIODS CAN SEMI-AUTOMATIC TRADERS AND ASSET
ALLOCATING INVESTORS TRADE WITH PARTICULAR INSTRUMENTS?


  Holding          Typical           Maximum         Likely instruments
  period          turnover            cost SR

  1 day              256             0.00031               None

  3 days              85              0.001        Cheapest futures, e.g.
                                                        NASDAQ

  1 month             12              0.0067      Nearly all futures except
                                                short maturity bonds, STIR*

  6.5 weeks            8               0.01     Index spread bets, e.g. FTSE

  3 months             4               0.02     Individual equity spread bets

  6 months            2.0              0.04      Cheapest ETFs, e.g. equity     Slowest semi-
                                                          indices               automatic trader

  One year            1.0              0.08      Benchmark inflation linked
                                                       bond ETF

  2.5 years           0.4              0.20       Most individual equities      Slowest asset
                                                                                allocating investor



The table shows for different holding periods the turnover in round trips per year, maximum
instrument cost if we pay no more than the recommended 0.08 SR a year, and typical
instruments at each cost level (estimates as of January 2015).

* Short term interest rate futures




190
                                                                              Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


Asset allocating investors can get down to an annual turnover of 0.40 round trips per
year, implying that a cost of 0.08 ÷ 0.40 = 0.20 SR is affordable.132 So ETFs, which we
estimated will cost at most 0.08 SR, will be fine. As I explain in the next section, semi-
automatic traders with very wide stop losses will realise a turnover of 2.0 round trips a
year. A cost of 0.08 ÷ 2.0 = 0.04 SR is the maximum they could pay. This rules out ETFs
but allows spread bets, which we costed at 0.01 SR.
I’ve done a similar analysis for staunch systems traders, for whom I recommend a
maximum of 0.13 SR units of cost per year. Table 35 gives the figures and I’ve also
shown how each level of turnover relates to the trading rules I presented in chapter seven,
‘Forecasts’.


TABLE 35: WHAT SPEED SYSTEMS CAN STAUNCH SYSTEMS TRADERS USE?


     Typical         Maximum            Likely instruments
    turnover          cost SR

       128              0.001            Cheapest futures,
                                           e.g. NASDAQ

       54              0.0024             Average future,             Fastest single trend following
                                          e.g. WTI Crude              rule I use (this the EWMAC 2,
                                                                      8 rule)*

       28              0.0046          Most futures except            Second fastest single trend
                                        short end bonds,              following rule (this is the
                                         equity volatility            EWMAC 4, 16 rule)
                                          indices, STIR

       12.5              0.01           Nearly all futures,           Set of rules used in chapter 15
                                        index spread bets

       7.5              0.017           Cheaper individual            Slowest trend following rule
                                        equity spread bets            I use (this is the EWMAC 64,
                                                                      256 rule)



The table shows for different levels of turnover in round trips per year the maximum
standardised instrument cost if you pay no more than the recommended 0.13 SR a year
for staunch systems traders, and typical instruments at each cost level (estimates as of
January 2015).

* Defined in chapter seven, ‘Forecasts’, and appendix B (page 282).

132. As you’ll see later in the chapter on page 195, this requires using a very slow look-back of 20 weeks
for volatility estimation.

                                                                                                        191
Systematic Trading



I’ve also shown the level of turnover that you’ll get with the set of trading rules that I
advocate using in chapter fifteen, where I explain in detail the design of the staunch
systems trader example. Staunch systematic traders who use this recommended set of
trading rules, which is fairly slow, will get a turnover of 12.5 round trips per year.133 You’d
get a maximum standardised cost of 0.13 ÷ 12.5 = 0.01 SR, which is fine for nearly all
major futures markets and index spread bets.

Deciding average holding period by setting stop losses

Semi-automatic trader

How should semi-automatic traders determine how quickly to trade? You might think
it depends on how trigger happy you are, with itchy fingered day traders clicking in and
out every few minutes, and relaxed macro traders trading every few weeks or months.
But I advocate that traders exclusively use a systematic stop loss to exit positions, no
matter how they decide to enter them. This means the average holding period will depend
mainly on how tight, or loose, your stops are set. You should then ensure that your
trading style, and the horizon you are trying to predict price movements for, is in line
with your stop levels.
If stops are set very tight then you’ll have short holding periods and high turnover. You
won’t be able to trade more expensive instruments with tight stops, since with a speed
limit on what you’re willing to pay in Sharpe ratio (SR) costs there will be a maximum
viable standardised cost.
Table 34 shows that with the cheapest futures you can use a relatively tight stop, with
a holding period of three days. However this would be far too expensive if you’re using
spread bets. I mentioned a particular spread betting system in the introductory chapter
which held positions for around a week. This would have a turnover of 52 round trips per
year. The standardised cost I’m using for spread bets is 0.01 SR, so this gives costs of 52
× 0.01 = 0.52 annually.
Earlier (page 150) I calculated the implied volatility target of that system at 160%. This
implies you’d need to make 0.52 × 160% = 83% a year on your trading capital before
costs – just to break even!
Table 34 shows that with spread bets you can’t use stops with holding periods of less than
about six weeks. Furthermore it’s unlikely that any trader will be happy with a holding
period of more than six months. So the slowest turnover you can get is 2 round trips a
year, which is the figure I used earlier in the chapter when looking at instrument selection.


133. This figure is calculated when we cover the staunch systems trader example in chapter fifteen on
page 251.

192
                                                                                 Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


Selecting trading rules

Staunch systems trader

In chapter three I said I don’t like to fit or calibrate trading rules using real performance.
But that prohibition only applies to pre-cost performance. I positively encourage you to
back-test and find the expected turnover of your trading rules and then reject variations
which are too expensive.
Using my recommended guideline for setting speed limits from above you don’t want
costs greater than 0.13 Sharpe ratio (SR). So you should be rejecting trading rules with
turnovers greater than 130 round trips per year for the very cheapest futures (cost 0.001
SR for each unit of turnover), over 65 round trips for the Euro Stoxx future (cost 0.002),
and with turnovers over 13 for a spread bet with a standardised cost of 0.01 SR.134
It is simplest to use the same trading rules and variations for all the instruments you
trade. This means you will need to drop any rules which are too fast for the most
expensive instrument you have; remaining rules will automatically be fine for the cheaper
ones. You’ll see how this is done in more detail in part four, chapter fifteen, which is the
example chapter for the staunch systems trader.
However if the set of instruments you have features trading costs that vary significantly
you might consider using faster variations only with the cheapest instruments, and using
a slower set of variations for the expensive ones. Costs in my own portfolio vary by a
factor of 40 across the futures that I trade, so this is the approach I use.

Trading slower rules – Weights to trading rules

Staunch systems trader

How should you determine the forecast weights to use when forming a combined
forecast? Unless you think that faster rules will give you a pre-cost Sharpe ratio (SR)
advantage which compensates for their costs you’re going to have less weight on higher
turnover rules, especially in instruments which are expensive to trade.
If you use bootstrapping to determine weights on a rolling out of sample basis then you
can include a correction for costs in estimates of returns. Bootstrapping will automatically

134. As I showed you earlier, trading rules aren’t the only source of turnover; we also have changes in price
volatility, which we’ll discuss later in the chapter. The costs you actually pay will also be inflated by the effect
of the forecast diversification multiplier. But for faster rules these are more than compensated by the effect
of position inertia: not trading position changes of less than 10%. All this makes it very hard in practice to
estimate the expected costs of trading a particular rule. Looking solely at the turnover of the forecast is the
simplest approach and is usually conservative enough.

                                                                                                                193
Systematic Trading



determine the right weights, accounting for predictable costs and uncertain profits. By
comparing the weights found when pooling results across the portfolio with those from
individual instruments it will also tell you if different forecast weights make sense, or if
you should use the same weights.
Personally I’ve never found consistent evidence in my own system that faster trading rules,
whether in general or as variations of a single rule, have a higher pre-cost Sharpe ratio
(SR).135 So if you’re deciding weights using handcrafting then I recommend that you
assume the same pre-cost SR for all trading rules, but account for their different trading
costs. You can then adjust forecast weights for trading rules based on your estimate of the
SR of costs, as we did in chapter four on page 86.
How do we do this?
Remember from chapter four that the adjustment is done by comparing the SR of an asset
versus the average across the portfolio. For each instrument and trading rule variation,
you should use the cost per round trip and the turnover to calculate the total cost in SR
units per year. If you’ve decided to keep the same set of trading rules for all instruments
you may want to use the same adjustments on every instrument, which means using the
highest and most conservative instrument standardised cost to do your adjustment, rather
than the specific cost for each instrument.
On a given instrument you should then take the average cost in SR points over all rules
you are finding weights for. Because costs are fairly predictable you should use column
A ‘With Certainty’ of the SR adjustment table 12 in chapter four (page 86). As an
extreme example, if you think that a particular rule is going to cost 0.13 SR per year,
versus an average for all rules of 0.03 SR, then the performance difference is 0.10 SR
worse than average and you should multiply its weight by 0.95.
With my recommended speed limit applying to exclude any trading rules with costs of
more than 0.13 SR, the adjustments made here will never be larger than 0.95 or 1.05. In
most cases they will be much smaller and not worth bothering with. However if you’re
using a higher speed limit then adjusting for trading rule costs could significantly alter
your weights.




135. The set of rules in my own system have turnovers of between 65 and six times a year, i.e. holding
periods of between four business days and a couple of months. As rules get slower than a turnover of six
their performance does start to worsen, and I exclude these rules entirely. For a turnover between six and 65,
pre-cost performance is relatively similar across variations of the same trading rules (and is often worse for
quicker trend following rules as most markets do not trend well at shorter horizons). However some kinds
of rules show better performance at shorter holding periods and you should do your own bootstrapping with
realistic costs to check this.

194
                                                                   Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


More conservative estimation of Sharpe ratio to set risk percentage

This section is relevant to all readers

Back in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’, I said that you should have realistic expectations
of likely Sharpe ratio (SR) to determine the optimal level of risk to take. If you’re doing
your own back-test, or estimating your likely performance in some other way, this needs
to be done on an after-cost basis.
Alternatively if you’re using the suggested figures for Sharpe ratio in the relevant chapters
of part four, then there’s nothing more to do as all these assumptions are post-cost.

Slower estimation of price volatility

This section is relevant to all readers

After forecasts the next source of turnover is the adjustment of positions to cope with
changes in the risk of each instrument – the instrument currency volatility, which I
defined on page 158. This in turn depends on how quickly you update your estimate of
the standard deviation of daily percentage returns, the price volatility, which was also
defined in chapter ten.
I mentioned three ways of estimating price volatility in that chapter. Two of these
methods involved formally calculating the standard deviation of price changes over a
volatility look-back period, either with a moving average or an exponentially weighted
moving average (EWMA). I suggested that these should be used by asset allocators and
staunch systems traders, with a default look-back of 25 business days, or 36 days with
an EWMA. The other method involved eyeballing the chart, which I recommended for
semi-automatic traders.


Asset allocating investor

Staunch systems trader

If you’re measuring price volatility using a simple moving average, or the equivalent
exponentially weighted EWMA, should you use my recommended look-back of 25 days
(five weeks of trading days), or a slower look-back of ten, or even 20 weeks? On page
157, figure 23 showed that slower look-backs are very sluggish to react to changes in
risk. My research suggests that look-backs over 20 weeks lead to much poorer trading



                                                                                             195
Systematic Trading



system performance. However faster look-backs change very frequently and will generate
additional turnover and thus cost more to trade.
First let’s quantify the effect of higher costs. You need to check the turnover for each
trading subsystem. This is all the trading that you’ll be doing for a particular instrument.
It will be what you get from any changes in forecasts, plus additional turnover as your
estimate of price volatility changes. You can ignore the other reasons for trading that I
discussed earlier, as these are relatively unimportant.
If you have multiple trading rules then you need to work out the trading coming from
your combined forecast across all trading rules. To get this first take the weighted average,
using forecast weights, of the turnover in round trips per year for each individual trading
rule. Then multiply this by the forecast diversification multiplier to get the turnover of
the combined forecast.
If you’re an asset allocating investor using the ‘no-rule’ rule of a constant forecast then
there are no forecast changes and you’ll have a zero turnover from trading rules.
You then need to apply a correction for the effect of changing your estimate of price
volatility, which always increases turnover. At the same time, you must also account
for the effect of position inertia, which I introduced on page 174 – not trading any
position change greater than 10%. This slows trading down.
You can see the net result of these two corrections in table 36. The table shows that
changing the look-back has almost no effect if the turnover of the original combined
forecast is five or more round trips per year. So if you’re trading fast trading rules, on
cheap instruments, then you can safely use the default look-back.
For slower rules it will depend on the precise costs of your instruments. Take the ‘no-rule’
rule used by asset allocating investors. As before let’s assume you’re trading ETFs with a
standardised cost of 0.08. With zero turnover in forecasts you should refer to the top
row of the table. Using the default five week look-back to estimate price volatility gives a
turnover of 1.6 round trips per year. You’d have costs of 1.6 × 0.08 = 0.13 Sharpe ratio
(SR) units annually. This violates the recommended speed limit of paying 0.08 SR in
costs for asset allocating investors, who are unlikely to see high performance from their
static portfolios.
In contrast with a 20 week look-back, giving a turnover of 0.40, you’d only pay 0.40 ×
0.08 = 0.032 SR. This is a quarter of the original cost, saves a substantial 0.10 SR units,
and is well within the speed limit. Notice that a turnover of 0.4 round trips per year is
the lowest an asset-allocating investor can achieve without slowing down their estimate of
price volatility beyond the maximum recommended 20 weeks.




196
                                                                          Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


TABLE 36: WHAT EFFECT DOES SLOWING DOWN YOUR ESTIMATE OF PRICE VOLATILITY HAVE?
A SLOWER ESTIMATE CAN REDUCE FINAL SYSTEM TURNOVER, IF UNDERLYING TRADING
RULES ARE ALSO SLOW

                            Look-back of price volatility estimate*
 Starting turnover
 of trading rules        20 weeks         10 weeks            5 weeks

 0 (no-rule rule)            0.4              0.8                1.6

 1                           1.2              1.5                2.5

 5                           4.7              5.0                5.7

 10                          9.4              9.8               10.2

 12.5                        11.7            12.2               12.6

 20                          19.1            19.2               19.7

 40                         39.2             39.2               39.4

 60                          60               60                 60


The table shows the final turnover, in round trips per year, we get from changing the
look-back for price volatility (columns) given a starting level of turnover from trading
rules (rows). Five weeks (25 business days) is the default look-back. Starting turnover is
the average turnover of your trading rules, weighted by forecast weights, multiplied by
forecast diversification multiplier. Position inertia is used to slow down trading.

* Using a simple moving average. For an exponentially weighted moving average the relevant look-backs are
144 days instead of 100 days, 72 days instead of 50 days, and 36 days instead of 25 days.




Semi-automatic Trader

The first method of estimating price volatility I discussed in chapter ten was eyeballing;
looking at the chart and figuring out what a typical daily move was. It’s obviously very
difficult to back-test this method as everyone’s perception is different. However you
should usually use a one month window on a chart to find the price volatility, since
this will give similar results to the 25 day volatility look-back I recommended for more
formal moving average methods. This is fine if you’re trading cheap instruments like
futures.
With more expensive assets, like spread bets and ETFs, then I’d suggest you still use a one
month window. However I would recommend that you also compare your estimate of

                                                                                                     197
Systematic Trading



the cash risk of an existing position (the instrument currency volatility defined on page
158) to the value you had yesterday. If the estimate hasn’t changed by more than 25%
from its last value then don’t bother to adjust it.
Just like position inertia this will reduce any trading caused by updating the volatility
estimate on existing positions and keep your costs down. However when opening new
positions you should use the most up-to-date estimate of volatility to work out your
initial trade size.

Choice of instrument weights

Asset allocating investor

Staunch systems trader
This isn’t relevant to semi-automatic traders who don’t trade a fixed set of trading
subsystems.

Suppose you’re running a portfolio including a cheap instrument like a Euro Stoxx future,
and a more expensive one like two year German bond (Schatz) futures. Perhaps you’ve
managed to find trading rules that make sense for each instrument and fitted some
forecast weights to them; or you could be an asset allocating investor who is going to
use the single ‘no-rule’ rule with a constant forecast. As in chapter eleven you must now
allocate your trading capital and think about the appropriate instrument weights to
give to each of these two trading subsystems.
Will you get lower after-cost performance from running trading systems for the more
expensive Schatz? If so then you should obviously give it a lower instrument weight. But
this is not a clear-cut decision. Academic research shows that the extra costs of owning less
liquid instruments are often outweighed by higher profits, such as the additional returns
you get from investing in the equities of smaller firms. As I briefly mentioned in chapter
two, ‘Systematic Trading Rules’, we tend to get rewarded for being exposed to illiquid
assets.
My own research shows that more expensive instruments usually perform somewhat
better even once costs are taken into account; but only if they’re traded relatively slowly,
with a turnover of less than 15 round trips per year. The improvement isn’t usually strong
enough to warrant a higher allocation, but it does mean that under-weighting costly
instruments doesn’t make sense. For asset-allocating investors (whose turnover from table
36 will be at most 1.4), and slower staunch systems traders, there is no need to consider
adjusting instrument weights in light of costs.
If you’re a fast systems trader, with a turnover of more than 15 round trips per year, then
my research shows that you will see worse relative performance after costs for expensive

198
                                                                Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


instruments. However if you’ve followed the advice I gave earlier then you wouldn’t be
trading them that quickly anyway, since you’d be breaking the speed limits implied by
the recommended limit of 0.08 Sharpe ratio (SR) units or 0.13 SR units, per year spent
on costs.
When you stick to the speed limit then only the very cheapest instruments would have
access to quick trading rules. So in general you’d either be trading cheaper instruments
more quickly than expensive ones, or trading all your instruments at the same relatively
slow pace. In my own research into systems with these features I don’t find any difference
in after-cost returns between instruments, regardless of their standardised costs.
In conclusion, unless bootstrapping tells you differently, I would recommend assuming
the same post-cost SR for all trading subsystems. If you’re using handcrafted instrument
weights this means no Sharpe ratio adjustment is needed to account for different cost
levels.


Trading with more or less capital

This section is relevant to all readers


Trading with a lot of capital
Let’s have another look at the order book in figure 24. An investor who wants to sell 437
contracts or fewer can assume they will pay at worst half the spread, 0.5 price units, as
they’re selling at 3,369 compared to the mid-price of 3,369.5. But a large hedge fund
which needs to sell more than this, like 5,000 lots, has a problem.
They have three options when they submit the order. Firstly they can cross the spread and
submit a single market order. They will get 3,369 for the first 437 lots, but the next 576
lots will go for 3,368, then 620 at 3,367 and so on. The average price received per lot will
be 3365.2, which compared to the original mid of 3,369.5 gives an execution cost of
4.3 points. The exact cost for any given trade will depend on the depth of the order book
when it is submitted.
Secondly they can offer 5,000 lots at 3,370, adding to the 7 lots already on the order
book. They might get lucky and meet a large buyer who takes their offer. This would beat
the mid-price by half a point, and get an effectively negative execution cost. But it’s much
more likely that on seeing this huge order other traders will push the price down, leaving
the order unfilled and the market at a worse level.
Finally the funds human traders or execution algorithims can break the order up into
chunks and execute it gradually. The order will take longer to execute and there will be
a lot of uncertainty about the fill level, and even if each chunk is small other market

                                                                                          199
Systematic Trading



participants will see the individual orders coming through and react accordingly, which
will probably result in the price drifting down.
In none of these three cases is the execution cost guaranteed to be exactly 0.5 points.
If you are trading in large size, in relatively illiquid markets and relatively quickly, you
can’t casually assume you will pay half the spread. If your typical order size is going to be
greater than the usual depth available at the inside spread, you need to do serious research
to calculate your expected trading costs, and to work hard at optimising your execution.

Trading with relatively little capital
Those with much lower fund values have a different problem. Think back to the example
in table 32 on page 173. The imaginary investor there had a €100,000 annualised cash
volatility target, and after working out the target positions they needed to short 2.62
S&P 500 futures contracts, based on the combined forecast of -10. But what if you are
an amateur investor with only €40,000? Running at the maximum recommended 50%
percentage volatility target would give you a mere €20,000 cash volatility target. With
one-fifth of the risk you’d get one-fifth of the target position. However you can’t short the
0.524 contracts this equates to. You’d have to short a rounded position of just one contract.
With a €20,000 volatility target if your S&P 500 combined forecast doubles from -10 to
-20, you’d still be short just one contract.136 With a forecast of -20 if the price volatility
then doubled, you’d still have just the single short.137 Your risk is much ‘lumpier’ than if
you could trade fractional contracts. The problem occurs because the minimum size of
the S&P future is quite big.138
As I explained in chapter six, ‘Instruments’, the minimum block size is relatively large
for many other instruments. Equities with very high prices – like Berkshire Hathaway
A shares, currently trading at $220,000 each – are obviously going to be an issue, whilst
UK spread betting firms may not allow you to trade in bets of only £1 per point on some
indices.
Apart from the S&P, many other futures contracts tend to have large nominal values
including long maturity bonds, CME currency futures, and some energy and agricultural
commodities. An extreme example is the Japanese 10 year bond future which currently
has a price of around 150 million yen, or $1.3 million. In some cases there are mini
versions of these large contracts, but these might not be liquid enough.
Even without a large minimum it may be impractical or uneconomic to trade small sizes.
With a per ticket cost of €4 to buy ETFs it doesn’t make sense to buy in blocks of less
than 100.


136. The number of contracts to hold would be -0.524 and -1.049 respectively. Both round to -1.
137. Doubling price volatility, all other things being equal, halves position size. The number of contracts to
hold would be -1.049 and -0.524 respectively. Both round to -1.
138. Actually what you’re trading here is the E-mini S&P 500 contract. There is an even larger full size future.

200
                                                                              Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


To find out where you could have minimum size problems you need to work through the
calculations in earlier chapters, assuming the maximum combined forecast. This will give
you the highest possible position for an instrument given the current level of volatility.
My recommended maximum absolute forecast of 20 will give you a maximum position
of 2 × volatility scalar × instrument weight × instrument diversification multiplier.
Staunch systems traders will need to check this for every instrument they are trading.
Semi-automatic traders should do the same calculation for any instruments they are
planning to place bets on. Asset allocating investors, whose forecast is always a constant
+10, should use half of the usual figure to get their maximum position: 1 × volatility
scalar × instrument weight × instrument diversification multiplier.
Let’s check the result for the example we’re using. In table 31 (page 172), the volatility
scalar for the S&P 500 was 7.43. This was calculated with a €100,000 cash volatility
target, so with a €20,000 volatility target it will be one-fifth the size. Hence the volatility
scalar with a lower account size is one-fifth of 7.43, or 1.49. From table 32 the instrument
weight is still 25%, and the diversification multiplier 1.41, so the maximum possible
position then is 2 × 1.49 × 25% × 1.41 = 1.05. This is clearly too low. No matter what
happens the position will be long or short one contract (or none).
It is a matter of judgment as to what kind of maximum position you’d find acceptable.
My recommendation is to be satisfied with a maximum possible position of four or more
instrument blocks. If you can’t get to this level you will need to consider taking one of
the following steps.139

  Increase weight to          If instead of 25% you put 100% of the example portfolio into the S&P
  instrument (only in         500 then your maximum position would be a slightly more reasonable
  moderation)                 3 contracts.* However any increase in weight will have to come from
                              other instruments hence moving instrument weights away from their
                              optimum, unless you also take the next option.

  Reduce overall              It’s better to increase the instrument weight by reducing the number
  portfolio size              of instruments you have, but still using the correct bootstrapped or
                              handcrafted weights. However this still reduces diversification. I’ll go
                              into more detail about determining the ideal portfolio size in the next
                              section.

  Remove instrument           If the instrument size is unreasonably large, and you will need to
                              significantly reduce the total number of assets in your portfolio to
                              accommodate it, then you should exclude it.




139. Another option which is theoretically possible but isn’t shown is to trade with a higher volatility target
by increasing the trading capital or the percentage volatility target. The former isn’t usually viable and the
latter is almost always extremely dangerous.

                                                                                                           201
Systematic Trading



  Live with it               You might have a large portfolio with just a few instruments where
                             size is a problem. For example half a dozen of the futures contracts
                             in my own portfolio of more than 40 have maximum positions of less
                             than four contracts.
                             On average my portfolio risk and return is about right, even if it is
                             lumpier than I would prefer on individual instruments. However I still
                             require that maximum positions are at least one instrument block, or
                             there is clearly no point including the relevant asset.


* The instrument weight goes from 25% to 100% and the instrument diversification multiplier falls from 1.41
to 1, as there’s only one instrument. The former increases the maximum position, the latter reduces it but
by less. The new maximum position calculation is 2 x 1.49 x 100% x 1.0 = 2.98.




Determining overall portfolio size

Asset Allocating Investor

Staunch Systems Trader

Given that small account sizes present problems, how would an asset allocating investor
with a few thousand euros decide how many of the thousands of exchange traded funds
to hold? How does a staunch systems trader without millions of dollars in trading
capital work out which of the 200 or so liquid futures contracts they should trade?
The principle you should follow is to hold the most diversified portfolio possible
without running into any problems with maximum positions. Ideally you want at least
one instrument from each major asset class. For each asset class you should choose
instruments that don’t give you a maximum position that is too small; as I said above
my recommendation would be to avoid anything with a maximum of less than four
instrument blocks.
You then only add additional instruments to an asset class if this doesn’t cause a small
maximum position problem to appear either in the new instrument or in an existing one.
You should also consider costs and the other characteristics which I discussed in chapter
six, ‘Instruments’. You’ll see examples of constructing these portfolios in the relevant
example chapters fourteen and sixteen, in part four.




202
                                                                      Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size


Semi-automatic Trader

Semi-automatic traders generally have smaller portfolios, and these are of an ad-hoc
group of instruments, rather than the fixed set used by others. But you should still check
you have no issues with low maximum positions on anything you’re likely to trade, for
example by using my recommendation to have at least a four block maximum position.
Remember from chapter eleven, ‘Portfolios’, (page 169) that your portfolio weights
are 100% divided equally by the maximum number of bets you’re likely to make, so
adjusting instrument weights is not an option for dealing with size problems. So if you
have problems you should consider reducing the size of your portfolio by lowering the
maximum number of bets, or not trading that instrument.


Summary of tailoring systems for costs and capital
Standardised cost estimate
 Cost to trade one     Execution costs: Half the bid-offer spread except for those with large
 block                 account sizes, dealing in illiquid markets or with very fast trading.
                       Fixed fees per ticket.
                       Fixed fees per position unit traded.
                       Percentage value fees and taxes.
                       The total cost to trade an instrument block should be calculated in the
                       same currency as the instrument’s value.
 Instrument            The expected daily standard deviation of the value of one instrument
 currency volatility   block in the currency of the instrument, as calculated in chapter ten,
                       ‘Position Sizing’, (page 158).
 Standardised cost     Annualised cost in Sharpe ratio (SR) per round trip (buy and sell):
                       Twice the cost to trade one block divided by annualised instrument
                       currency volatility (daily instrument currency volatility multiplied by 16).




                                                                                                 203
Systematic Trading



Calculating cost of trading rules and trading subsystems

 Approximate           To calculate the standardised turnover in round trips (buys and sells)
 turnover from a       per year:
 back-test
                       (Number of instrument blocks traded per year) ÷
                       (2 × average absolute number of blocks held)

 Turnover for          Calculated from back-test or implied from rules of thumb. Rules of
 systematic trading    thumb for my suggested trading rules explained in chapter seven,
 rules                 ‘Forecasts’, are available in the relevant example in chapter fifteen.

 Cost of trading       Turnover for trading rule, in round trips per year, multiplied by
 rule for instrument   standardised cost for instrument.

 Turnover from         Staunch systems traders: Can get this from back-test, or by taking a
 forecast changes      weighted average, using forecast weights of trading rule turnovers,
                       multiplied by forecast diversification multiplier.
                       The turnover of the ‘no-rule’ rule used by asset allocating investors is
                       zero.
                       Semi-automatic traders should use the turnover implied by the holding
                       period which is determined by their stop loss, from table 34. More detail
                       is given in chapter thirteen.

 Turnover for          The turnover from forecast changes is corrected for the look-back used
 trading subsystem     to estimate price volatility and position inertia, using table 36.

 Cost of trading       Turnover for trading subsystem multiplied by standardised cost for
 subsystem             instrument.




Taking action to cope with costs

 Speed limit           I recommend that the costs of an instrument’s trading subsystem
                       should be at most one-third of a conservative estimate of the pre-cost
                       Sharpe ratio (SR). Staunch systems traders should assume a maximum
                       pre-cost SR of 0.40 and others an SR of 0.25.
                       This implies that staunch systems traders should not pay more than
                       0.13 Sharpe ratio per year in costs, and semi-automatic traders and
                       asset allocators no more than 0.08 SR.




204
                                                                 Chapter Twelve. Speed and Size



Which instruments   For a given type of trader there is a minimum level of turnover in round
to trade            trips per year. Given a limit on how much you are prepared to pay in
                    costs a year, and this minimum level of turnover, you will get a maximum
                    feasible standardised cost. This implies that certain instruments will be
                    too expensive to trade.
                    Asset allocators can get down to an annual turnover of 0.40, so using
                    my recommended maximum of spending 0.08 Sharpe ratio (SR) units
                    on costs would exclude all instruments with costs greater than 0.20 SR.
                    For semi-automatic traders, who I also suggest shouldn’t pay more
                    than 0.08 SR on costs, the lowest achievable turnover with a very loose
                    stop loss is 1.8 round trips per year, so instruments with standardised
                    costs greater than 0.044 SR can’t be used.
                    For staunch systems traders using my suggested set of trading rules
                    the minimum turnover would be 12.5 round trips per year, which with
                    my recommended limit of 0.13 SR a year on costs, implies that you
                    shouldn’t use instruments with costs greater than 0.01 SR.

Deciding average    If you’re a semi-automatic trader then I recommend that you should set
holding period      your stop loss rule to give an average holding period so that turnover
                    multiplied by standardised cost of your most expensive instrument is
                    at most 0.08 Sharpe ratio units a year.

Selecting trading   You should exclude trading rules which are unaffordable for a given
rules               instrument given my recommended maximum for staunch systems
                    traders of spending no more than 0.13 Sharpe ratio units a year on
                    costs. This can be calculated for each instrument individually, or using
                    the highest and most conservative instrument cost.

Forecast weights    Bootstrap the weights with cost adjustment or if using handcrafting I
for trading rules   recommend assuming the same pre-cost Sharpe ratio (SR).
                    This means adjusting handcrafted weights depending on the SR cost
                    versus average across trading rules, using ‘with certainty’ column A of
                    table 13 (page 89).

Finding Sharpe      If you’re back-testing the system yourself then you must deduct costs.
ratio to set risk   You don’t need to do anything further if using the default post-cost
percentage          expectations that I use in the example chapters of part four.

Slowing down        Asset allocating investors and staunch systems traders should see
estimation of       table 36 for the effect on turnover of changing the look-back on
price volatility    volatility estimation. You should then check to see if slowing down your
                    estimation will significantly reduce costs.
                    Semi-automatic traders who need to lower costs should not adjust
                    their eyeballed estimate of instrument currency volatility unless it has
                    changed by more than 25%.

Instrument          Bootstrap the weights with cost adjustment, or if handcrafting I
weights             recommend assuming the same after cost Sharpe ratio, implying no
for trading         adjustment to instrument weights.
subsystems



                                                                                           205
Systematic Trading



Too much capital

 When simple cost      If you can’t always trade for half the spread, due to trades larger than
 calculations aren’t   the typical size at the top of the order book, then you need to use more
 enough                complex cost models to account for execution costs.



Too little capital

 Calculate             Staunch systems traders and semi-automatic traders should assume
 maximum possible      the maximum combined forecast of +20, which implies a maximum
 position              possible position of:
                       2 × volatility scalar × instrument weight × instrument diversification
                       multiplier
                       For asset allocating investors there is a constant forecast of +10, which
                       implies a maximum possible position of:
                       1 × volatility scalar × instrument weight × instrument diversification
                       multiplier

 Very low rounded      I recommend taking action if the maximum possible position is less
 maximum possible      than four instrument blocks.
 position
                       Consider dropping the instrument, increasing the portfolio weight and/
                       or reducing the number of instruments traded overall.

 Sufficiently          No action required.
 high rounded
                       I would personally be happy if the maximum possible position was at
 maximum possible
                       least four instrument blocks.
 position



Determining portfolio size and make-up

 Asset allocating      You should hold the most diversified portfolio possible, consistent with
 investors and         avoiding issues with maximum positions that are too small. I recommend
 Staunch Systems       having a maximum possible position of at least four instrument blocks
 Traders               in any instrument.

 Semi-automatic        Portfolio size is determined by the maximum number of bets. Check you
 traders               won’t have an issue with low maximum positions with any instrument
                       before trading.


This is the end of part three. Part four will delve further into customising the framework
as we look at three examples in detail: the semi-automatic trader, the asset allocating
investor and the staunch systems trader.
206
PART FOUR.


Practice
Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader

I N THIS FINAL PART OF THE BOOK I’LL SHOW YOU HOW TO PUT THE
  framework into action for three specific examples. This first chapter is for semi-
automatic traders, who make their own discretionary forecasts about price movements,
but then use my systematic framework to manage their capital and position risk.


Chapter overview

 Who are you?                Introducing the semi-automatic trader.

 Using the framework         How you will use the systematic framework as a semi-automatic
                             trader.

 Process                     The process you need to follow each morning and as you are
                             trading throughout the day.

 Trading diary               A diary showing how you could have traded the markets as a
                             semi-automatic trader in late 2014.




Who are you?
As a semi-automatic trader you want to make your own calls on the market, but within
a systematic framework. With stop losses, risk targeting and position sizing taken care
of you can focus on getting the buy or sell decision correct. This will give you the best of
both worlds – your human ability to interpret and process information, combined with a
system giving the correct amount of risk.
It will not be easy sticking to the framework. The system may force you to trade, or
prevent you from trading, when you would rather do otherwise. However there are


                                                                                         209
Systematic Trading



significant benefits in sticking to a consistent strategy. I strongly recommend that you
design a system you’re comfortable with and then do not deviate from it.
In the specific example discussed in this chapter we’ll assume you’re going to be trading
spread bets on equity indices and FX, as reasonable sized amateur investors with a notional
trading capital of £100,000. You could be trading full-time, or on a part-time basis for
perhaps an hour each morning. However you can apply this framework to any market
where leverage is possible and to any account size.
As a semi-automatic trader you’ll be trading sporadically as opportunities arise. This
presents some challenges in using my systematic framework, which normally requires a
series of calculations to be performed each time you trade.
To reduce the workload you’ll first do some daily housekeeping on your current portfolio:
closing out any positions that have hit stop losses, adjusting estimates of trading capital
and price volatility, and doing any trades on existing positions that are now required.
You’ll then put on any new trades which look promising based on overnight moves.
If you’re trading part-time you will leave stop loss orders with your broker and go to
your day job. However if you’re trading full-time you’ll continue to watch the markets,
potentially putting further trades on, and closing positions that hit stop losses. You won’t
however repeat the more time-consuming housekeeping tasks until the next morning.


Using the framework

Instrument choice: size and costs
As semi-automatic traders you don’t trade a fixed set of instruments. At any given time
you will have a small number of positions, or ‘bets’, open. Those positions are drawn from
a larger pool of instruments that you’ve formed opinions on.
You’ll be using quarterly spread bets, with all bets in multiples of £1 per point. For example
if you go long the FTSE at £2 per point, and it goes from 6500 to 6501, then you’d earn
£2.140 The bet size will be determined by the broker’s minimum bet size, usually between
£1 and £10 depending on the instrument. In line with the advice in chapter twelve,
‘Speed and Size’, (page 200) you should check that any position you’re putting on would
be at least four instrument blocks with a maximum forecast of 20.
You should also check that the standardised costs of trading any potential instrument
will be 0.01 Sharpe ratio units or less, for reasons explained in detail below. Finally
you should avoid very low volatility instruments, for the numerous reasons enumerated
throughout part three.

140. There are several other important aspects of spread betting that I don’t have space to discuss here. I
assume that if you intend to actually trade the system shown here you are already familiar with spread betting.
If not you should consult the books I’ve recommended in appendix A, or similar resources.

210
                                                                     Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader


Forecasts and stop losses
As I discussed in chapter seven, ‘Forecasts’, (page 115) you’ll need to have a graduated
opinion on likely price movements whenever you decide to open a new position or ‘bet’.
These need to be translated into quantifiable forecasts, as in table 37. Note if you weren’t
using spread bets or other derivatives, and couldn’t short sell assets, you’d need to limit
yourself to making positive forecasts.


TABLE 37: TRANSLATING OPINIONS INTO A QUANTIFIED FORECAST141

   Very
  strong      Strong                 Weak                     Weak               Strong         Very
    sell       Sell        Sell       sell       Neutral      buy         Buy     buy        strong buy

    -20          -15        -10        -5           0            5         10       15           20


I strongly recommend that you do not change your forecast once a bet is open. Otherwise
you might be tempted to take profits too early, or double up on losses. You can sometimes
add new bets on top of an existing position, of which more later. But you will be using a
systematic trailing stop loss rule to close all your positions – no other exit rules are permitted.
The stop loss rule is loosely related to the ‘early loss taker’ system I’ve used for examples in
previous chapters. It uses stops set at a multiple of the current value of the daily standard
deviation of prices.

  Parameter X           You should set a parameter X which will be related to how long you want to
                        hold positions for and your trading costs.* I recommend X = 4, for reasons
                        I explain below.

  Volatility units      The expected standard deviation of daily price changes, in price points.
                        Note we use volatility in price points, not percentage points as normal. The
                        volatility in price points is equal to the percentage point volatility (price
                        volatility as defined in chapter ten, ‘Position sizing’, on ‘“Price volatility” on
                        page 155), multiplied by the current price. In this chapter you’ll find this
                        by eyeballing a one month chart of recent price changes (as discussed in
                        chapter ten, page 155), since you’re probably going to be using charts to
                        decide on your entries. You need to update this estimate throughout the
                        life of the trade and adjust the stop accordingly. (As suggested in chapter
                        twelve, you don’t need to update your volatility estimate unless it has
                        changed by more than 25% from the previous value.)
                        For example as I write this the standard deviation of oil prices is $1.5 per
                        day.




141. This is identical to table 16 and is repeated here for ease of reference.

                                                                                                          211
Systematic Trading



  Trailing stop         If the price of the instrument falls by more than X volatility units from
  loss when long        the high achieved since entry then you should close your position. As an
                        example suppose the high of crude was $70, so with X = 4 and volatility
                        units of $1.5, that implies a stop loss of $70 - (4 × $1.5) = $64

  Trailing stop         You will generate a closing trade when a price rises by more than X volatility
  loss when             units from the low reached after entry. So again for crude if the recent low
  short                 was $30, then that implies a stop loss of $30 + (4 × $1.5) = $46


* ‘X’ is equivalent to the ‘B’ parameter in the generic ‘A and B’ system which I describe in appendix B.



What value of X should you use? It depends on whether you have a short or long-term
forecasting horizon, and on the costs of your instruments. So with a shorter forecasting
horizon you’ll cut more quickly, hold positions for less time, and it will be more expensive
to trade. It’s important to match the forecasting horizon and the tightness of your stop
loss. There is no point making a forecast of prices for the next six months if you’re likely
to be stopped out by next Tuesday. Table 38 shows the average holding period for a given
value of X.142


TABLE 38: HOW DOES THE X PARAMETER IN YOUR STOP LOSS RULE DETERMINE YOUR
AVERAGE HOLDING PERIOD? SMALLER VALUES OF X MEAN TIGHTER STOP LOSSES AND
SHORTER HORIZONS, BUT REQUIRE CHEAPER INSTRUMENTS

  Value of X         Average holding         Turnover, round           Maximum
                         period               trips per year            cost SR

  1                       4 days                     64                 0.0013

  2                       9 days                     29                 0.0027

  3                       17 days                    15                 0.0053

  4                     6.5 weeks                     8                   0.01

  8                      13 weeks                    4.0                  0.02

  10                    26 weeks                     2.0                  0.04


The table shows for each value of X (rows): the average holding period, in business days or
weeks; the implied turnover in round trips per year; and the maximum instrument cost if


142. I produced this table using both artificial and real market data drawn from a number of asset classes.
Because we obviously can’t simulate a discretionary rule I used a random entry rule. Interestingly this is
actually profitable in real data, because even with a random entry we can still capitalise on trends by using
the stop loss exit rule.
212
                                                                 Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader


we pay no more than 0.08 Sharpe ratio units per year. The turnover includes the additional
trading we get from changes in price volatility and also assumes we don’t trade position
changes of less than 10% (position inertia).


As you saw in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, you need to adjust X given the cost of the
instruments you’re trading. The final column of table 38 shows a suggested maximum
feasible standardised cost, in Sharpe ratio (SR) units per year, for a given value of X.
This is calculated using my recommended speed limit of spending 0.08 SR units per year
on costs, from chapter twelve.
Also in chapter twelve (page 183) I suggested you use a costs figure of 0.01 SR units as
the standardised cost for all of your spread bets. The table shows you could safely use an
X of 4 or higher with spread bets, although if you’re trading cheap futures contracts you
could go quicker.
I don’t advise using different stop loss systems for different instruments as this complicates
life and can lead to mistakes. So the value of X should be set conservatively using the cost
of the most expensive instrument you’re likely to trade.
In this chapter we are going to use an X of 4, which means I assume you’re predicting
trends that last for just over six weeks.
Note that unlike in the original ‘early loss taker’ system you won’t be using a profit
target. Why not? My own research shows no evidence that systematic profit targets work
consistently.143 This is because most markets exhibit trending behaviour, and a profit
target will get you out of trends too early.
To summarise you mustn’t close your trade until you hit a stop loss; then you must close
it. Sticking to this rule will be difficult, but will mean that your risk is controlled and that
your returns will have the favourable positive skew of trend following traders.

Volatility targeting
I’ve already set the initial trading capital of this example at £100,000. But how aggressive
should you be with this money – what should your percentage volatility target be? You
need to refer back to chapter nine, ‘Volatility Targeting’. In this example I am going to
assume that your Sharpe ratio (SR) will be at least 0.30 after costs, which I calculate below
as 0.08 SR units. This is comfortably under my recommended maximum expectation of
0.50 (from page 46). Referring to column D of table 26 (page 148) an SR of 0.30
gives a risk percentage of 15%, and I’m assuming you can cope with the pain that implies.



143. There are some situations where closing trades before a stop loss is hit makes sense, such as relative
value or mean reverting strategies, but in my opinion it is better to build the closing rule into a fully
systematic trading rule.

                                                                                                       213
Systematic Trading



This implies you’ll have an annual volatility target of £100,000 × 15% = £15,000 and
a daily target of £15,000 ÷ 16 = £937.50.144 Because you’re using spread bets there is no
concern about hitting a relatively modest risk percentage of 15%. As always you should
avoid low volatility assets where the required leverage will be too high.
You’ll be measuring your account value daily, recalculating trading capital, and adjusting
your volatility target accordingly. This might trigger trades on existing positions and the
new volatility target will be used to size any new bets you make.

Position sizing
You can now think about ‘Position sizing’, as discussed in chapter ten. First you need to
measure the recent percentage standard deviation of returns (price volatility) in each
market to determine the expected daily variation in the value of one instrument block
(the instrument currency volatility).
I’d suggest you use the eyeball technique described in chapter ten (page 155), which
you’re already using to calculate the volatility estimate needed for stop loss levels. This
should be done daily on any instruments where you have positions, and ideally on
anything you might place bets on today.145 Changes in price volatility for your existing
positions might trigger trades.
From table 38 (page 212) with the suggested X of 4 you would expect to get a turnover
of 8 after accounting for the effects of sizing your position. With standardised costs of
0.01 SR units for spread bets this gives us an annual cost of 8 × 0.01 = 0.08 Sharpe ratio
(SR) units, which just squeaks in at the maximum level of 0.08 SR that I recommended
in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.
With 15% annualised volatility that equates to a performance drag from costs of 0.08 ×
15% = 1.2% a year. This is more than most passive ETFs, but significantly cheaper than
a hedge fund. You’d also have to pay perhaps 0.6% for rolling your quarterly bets.146
You can save on costs by following the advice in the chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, and
not adjusting your estimate of instrument currency volatility if the previous level looks
about right, say within 25% of the current value.
As you’re spread betting, the value of a 1% move (the block value) depends on the bet
size in pounds per point, so you won’t need to use exchange rates even when betting on
non-UK markets. So for example with crude oil at $65, a 1% move of $0.65 or 0.65
points, at a broker’s minimum of £10 a point, will have a value of £6.50.


144. As before to go from annual to daily volatility you need to divide by the ‘square root of time’, which
assuming 256 business days in a year is 16.
145. Working out the instrument currency volatility for a potential trade in advance makes the process more
efficient but might not always be possible, in which case you will need to do your estimation just before you
trade.
146. Assuming the full spread is charged on rolls.

214
                                                         Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader


With this information you can use your volatility target to work out the volatility scalars
every morning to use for both existing and potential trades.

Portfolios
To size your bets you need to determine your preferred maximum and average number
of concurrent bets, as I explained in chapter eleven, ‘Portfolios’. These terms are self
explanatory: the maximum number of bets is the most positions you will have on at
any given time, and the average is what you expect to have on a typical day. As I said
in chapter eleven, the instrument weight you use to size each of your positions will be
100% divided by the maximum number of bets.
The instrument diversification multiplier will be the maximum number of bets divided
by the average. This multiplier ensures the total average absolute forecast will be 10 with
the average number of bets on, which ensures your forecasting is consistent with the rest
of the systematic framework. I recommended that the multiplier shouldn’t be greater
than 2.5, which limits the value of the maximum relative to the average.
If you already have your maximum number of bets on, and you desperately need to make
a new bet, then sorry: you can’t. Wait until one of your existing bets has stopped out. If
they all continue to be profitable then perhaps your new bet wasn’t necessary after all.
Although this may seem rigid, sticking to this ensures that you have the correct risk on for
each bet and it will stop you from putting on dangerous numbers of simultaneous bets.
Make sure you set your maximum high enough when designing your system to cover
your likely appetite for extra bets.
Earlier I said you shouldn’t change the forecast on an existing bet. However you can add to
positions by placing a new, separate, bet on an instrument which you’re already holding.
This allows pyramiding positions, such as buying into a strengthening trend. The new bet
is completely distinct, will have its own stop loss, and could be closed at a different time.
A new bet on an existing position counts towards your maximum number of bets.
This can’t be used as a loophole to close positions; you can’t put on a new bet which will
make your existing position smaller or reverse it. Finally, to avoid concentrating your risk
too heavily I strongly recommend that you don’t have a total of more than 40 forecast
units bet on any asset at once, added up over all the bets on that instrument. So a forecast
of +10 on your first bet, followed by +25 on your second for the same instrument would
be acceptable. But you couldn’t place a third bet of more than +5.
In this chapter I am going to assume you have a maximum of four positions, with an
average of three. So each position will have an instrument weight of 100% ÷ 4 = 25%,
and the diversification multiplier is 4 ÷ 3 = 1.33.
As you saw in chapter nine, ‘Volatility targeting’, (page 150) the use of systematic stop
losses allows you to compare my framework with traditional money management systems,



                                                                                            215
Systematic Trading



where you put a fixed percentage of your capital at risk. Each bet you make puts at risk a
percentage of capital equal to:
(X × forecast × percentage volatility target) ÷ (10 × 16 × average number of bets)
In this example with an X of 4, the average forecast of 10, a 15% volatility target and an
average of three positions you are putting (4 × 10 × 15%) ÷ (10 × 16 × 3) = 1.25% of
your capital at risk on average per bet. With the maximum forecast of 20 you’d be risking
twice that, 2.5%. This is relatively large, but remember that you expect to be holding
these positions for around six weeks.

Trading in practice
You should first check to see if any stop losses on existing positions have been hit, and
trade on those immediately if you didn’t leave stop losses with your broker.147 Then you
can look at potential new entries and come up with a numeric forecast for them. On every
new trade you’ll need to calculate a stop loss based on the value of X, the price volatility
and the entry price.
Stop losses on existing positions will also need to be adjusted if price volatility changes.
They also need to be moved up if prices reach new highs (for longs), and down for new
lows (on shorts).
Part-time daily traders should then update the stop loss limits they have left with their
brokers and go to work at their real jobs. If you’re still trading intra-day you will continue
to monitor the market for new entries and to see if stops have been hit. You could also
update stop loss levels intra-day if significant new levels are reached, but with the relatively
large value of X I’ve suggested for this chapter this probably isn’t necessary.


Process
Here is the process to follow when running this system. The trading diary in the next
section illustrates in more detail how the calculations are done.




147. I’m mostly agnostic about whether stop loss orders should be left with brokers, or entered only when
prices hit the relevant level. However, unless you are watching the markets all day it is safer to leave stop loss
orders in place. Pre-entered orders also prevent you from ignoring an exit and staying in the trade.

216
                                                           Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader


Daily housekeeping


 Check stops          If not using stop orders left with brokers check to see if any stop levels
                      have been hit on existing positions, and if necessary do closing trades.

 Get account value    Get today’s account value and calculate your current trading capital.
                      Your annualised cash volatility target is current capital × percentage
                      volatility target (In this chapter we use 15%).

 Daily cash           Daily cash volatility target equals one-sixteenth of annualised cash
 volatility target    volatility target. (As usual this is the ‘square root of time’ rule; with
                      around 256 business days in a year you should divide by 16 to go from
                      annual to daily risk.)

 Get latest prices    Get charts for all instruments you have positions on and ideally anything
                      you might wish to trade today.

 Calculate daily      Using a one month chart eyeball the price volatility of each instrument
 price volatility     you own, or might trade today. With FX rate of 1 and relevant block
                      values convert this to instrument value volatility.
                      For existing positions if the volatility level you used yesterday is not
                      within 25% of today’s level then update your estimate; otherwise stick
                      with yesterday’s estimate. For potential positions you should always
                      use the most up-to-date estimate.

 Recalculate stops    Update stops on existing instruments so they trail new highs (for longs)
                      or new lows (for shorts), and account for the latest value of price
                      volatility.

 Volatility scalar    This is equal to the daily cash volatility target divided by instrument
                      value volatility for each instrument.

 Desired subsystem    Original forecast multiplied by volatility scalar, divided by 10.
 position on an
 existing bet

 Desired portfolio    Desired subsystem position multiplied by instrument weight and by
 instrument           instrument diversification multiplier.
 position on an
                      With the maximum of four bets used in the example, and an average
 existing bet
                      of 3 bets, you should use an instrument weight of 25% and a multiplier
                      of 1.33.

 Desired target       Portfolio instrument position rounded to nearest whole block.
 position on an
 existing bet

 Issue trades on      Compare current position to target position. If out by more than 10%
 existing positions   then issue adjusting orders (position inertia).

 Check setups         Check charts and news for potential new bets. If any exist go to
                      instructions for new position opening.


                                                                                              217
Systematic Trading



Further intra-day process (for full-time traders only)


 Check stop losses     Check to see if any stop losses have been triggered. If not using broker
                       stops then issue closing trades.

 Check setups          Check charts and news for potential trade setups. If any exist go to
                       instructions for new position opening.




New position opening


 Calculate forecast    Use table 37 (page 211) to calculate your forecast for the instrument.

 Is it allowed?        Do you already have the maximum number of bets on? (For the
                       example system this is four.)
                       Is the bet on an instrument with an existing position? If so it must not
                       reduce or reverse the position, or put the total absolute forecast across
                       all bets for this instrument over 40.

 Calculate             If not pre-calculated in the morning, using a one month chart eyeball
 instrument value      the price volatility of each instrument. With FX rate of 1 and relevant
 volatility            block values convert this to instrument value volatility.

 Calculate stop loss   Use X multiplied by the daily price volatility in price points to find
                       where to set the stop loss relative to the entry price. In this chapter I’ve
                       used an X of 4.

 Volatility scalar     This morning’s daily cash volatility target divided by instrument value
                       volatility for the instrument.

 Subsystem             Forecast multiplied by volatility scalar, divided by 10.
 position

 Portfolio             Subsystem position multiplied by instrument weight (25% in the
 instrument            example) and then multiplied by instrument diversification multiplier
 position              (1.33 in the example).

 Rounded target        Portfolio instrument position rounded to nearest block.
 position

 Trade                 You should now put on the trade and once completed calculate
                       the initial stop loss relative to the entry price. With judicious use of
                       spreadsheets the above steps can be completed in a few moments.




218
                                                        Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader


Trading diary
Here is some paper trading I did using the semi-automatic trading system. All the
calculations here have been done with a spreadsheet, which is available from my website.
Prices and other values are rounded to make the example clearer.

15 October 2014
Typical minimum spread bets are £10 a point on crude, £5 on US S&P 500 equities and £1
on the European Euro Stoxx equity index. These and the price determine the block value.
Note that the block values are all in British pounds, the same currency as my account, even
though the prices are quoted in other currencies, as we’re betting in £1 per point. So the
FX rates are all 1. Starting trading capital is £100,000; annual volatility target at 15% is
£15,000 and starting daily volatility target is one sixteenth of that, £937.50.

                                       Crude        S&P 500        Euro Stoxx

 Daily volatility target (A)           £937.50       £937.50         £937.50
 Price (B)                               83           1880            2900
 Bet size, per point (C)                 £10           £5               £1
 FX (D)                                   1             1                1
 Block value (E)                        £8.30          £94             £29
 C × B ÷ 100
 Price volatility, points (F)             1            20               50
 Price volatility, % (G)                1.20           1.06            1.72
 F÷B
 Instrument currency volatility (H)      £10          £100             £50
 G×E
 Instrument value volatility (I)         £10          £100             £50
 H×D
 Volatility scalar (J)                  93.75         9.375            18.75
 A÷I




                                                                                           219
Systematic Trading



For my forecasts I’m feeling very bullish on US equities, bullish on crude and bearish on
European equities.

                                             Crude       S&P 500         Euro Stoxx

 Forecast (K)                                  10           15               -10
 Subsystem position, blocks (L)               93.75        14.06           -18.75
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)                        25%          25%              25%
 Instrument diversification multiplier (N)    1.33          1.33            1.33
 Portfolio instrument position, blocks (O)    31.25        4.687            -6.2
 L×M×N
 Rounded target position, blocks (P =          31            5               -6
 round O)
 Entry price (Q)                               83          1880             2900
 Stop loss offset (R)                          4            80              200
 F × X with X = 4
 Stop loss (S)                                 79          1800             3100
 Q plus or minus R


So I go long crude at 31 × £10 = £310 a point with a $79 stop loss, long S&P 500 at 5 ×
£5 = £25 per point with an 1800 stop loss, and short Euro Stoxx at 6 × £1 = £6 per point
with a 3100 stop loss.

29 October 2014

                                             Crude       S&P 500         Euro Stoxx

 Forecast                                      10           15               -10
 Entry price                                  83           1880             2900
 Current price                                 81          1980             3020
 High (Low) since entry (T)                   83           1980            (2900)
 Stop loss (S = T plus or minus R)             79          1900             3100
 Current position, blocks                      31            5               -6
 Gain (Loss)                                 (£620)       £2,500           (£720)
 Portfolio instrument position, blocks (O)    31.5         4.73             -6.3
 Rounded target position, blocks (P)           32            5               -6




220
                                                          Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader


No stops triggered and the trailing stop loss for S&P 500 has been moved up. The net
profit in my account is £1,160, so current capital is £101,160 and the daily volatility
target is £948. The price volatility and instrument value volatility hasn’t changed on
any instrument by more than 25%, so I haven’t adjusted these. Current positions are still
within 10% of the target; there is no need to buy one more instrument block of crude
to get to a rounded position of 32.
I feel very strongly about the S&P bet now and I’m going to add to my position. So I will
bet a separate +25 forecast, taking me up to the maximum of +40 for all S&P 500 bets. It
will also help hedge my Euro Stoxx short, which is doing very badly though hasn’t yet hit
it’s stop. I now have four bets on, two of which are in S&P 500, so I can’t place any more.

                                   S&P 500                                           S&P 500
                                     (2)                                               (2)

 Daily volatility target (A)        £948     Forecast (K)                               25
 Price (B)                          1980     Subsystem position (L)                    23.7
                                             K × J ÷ 10
 Bet size, per point (C)             £5      Instrument weight (M)                     25%
 FX (D)                               1      Instrument diversification                1.33
                                             multiplier (N)
 Block value (E)                    £99      Portfolio instrument position (O)         7.88
 C × B ÷ 100                                 L×M×N
 Price volatility, points (F)        20      Rounded target position, and                8
                                             trade (P = round O)
 Price volatility, % (G)             1.01    Entry price (Q)                           1980
 F÷B
 Instrument currency volatility     £100     Stop loss offset (R)                       80
 (H)
                                             F × X with X = 4
 G×E
 Instrument value volatility (I)    £100     Stop loss (S)                             1900
 H×D                                         Q plus or minus R
 Volatility scalar (J)              9.46
 A÷I


I go long another eight £5 a point blocks of S&P 500. Because we’re trading at a recent
high this has the same stop level as my existing bet.




                                                                                              221
Systematic Trading



4 November 2014
Sadly my long in crude is now closed.

                                        Crude        S&P 500    S&P 500     Euro Stoxx
                                                       (1)        (2)

 Forecast                                 10           15          25           -10
 Entry price                              83          1880        1980         2900
 Current price                           78.7         2018        2018         3034
 High (Low) since entry (T)               83          2018        2018        (2900)
 Stop loss (S = T plus or minus R)        79          1938        1938         3100
 Current Position, blocks                 31            5          8            -6
 Gain (Loss)                           (£1,333)      £3,450      £1,520       (£804)
 Portfolio instrument position,      0.0 (Hit stop    4.81        8.01         -6.43
 blocks (O)                              loss)
 Rounded target position, blocks          0             5          8            -6
 (P)


The net gain is £2,833, so trading capital is up to £102,833 and daily volatility target is
£964. Again price volatility hasn’t changed significantly on any instrument. Apart from
closing crude there are no adjustment trades needed. I’m tempted to take profits on my
only profitable trade, the S&P 500 longs, but I can’t because it isn’t part of the system!

13 November 2014
I decide, belatedly, to short crude at $75 with a forecast of -10 which corresponds to a
position of short 32 blocks with a stop of $79.

21 November 2014
Ouch! Euro Stoxx has also bitten the dust.

                                      Crude (2)      S&P 500    S&P 500     Euro Stoxx
                                                       (1)        (2)

 Forecast                                -10           15          25           -10
 Entry price                              75          1880        1980        2900
 Current price                            76          2063       2063          3130
 High (Low) since entry (T)              (75)         2063       2063         (2900)
 Stop loss (S = T plus or minus R)        79          1983        1983         3100
 Position                                -32            5          8            -6


222
                                                        Chapter Thirteen. Semi-automatic Trader



 Gain (Loss)                           (£320)        £4,575       £3,320        (£1,380)
 Portfolio instrument position,         -32.8          4.9          8.2       0.0 Hit stop
 blocks (O)
 Rounded target position, blocks         -33            5            8             0
 (P)


My accumulated profit is £4,862. If I wasn’t trading systematically I’d also be tempted to
cut my oil short, as I don’t seem to be calling crude very well.

28 November 2014
My crude oil is finally paying off – crude drops $5 in one day! The current price volatility
of $1 per day for crude now looks too low, so I’m going to double it to $2. I’m up £7,682
in accumulated profits, so the daily volatility target is £1,010.

                                      Crude (2)     S&P 500      S&P 500
                                                      (1)          (2)

 Daily volatility target (A)           £1,010        £1,010       £1,010
 Forecast                                -10           15           25
 Entry price                             75           1880         1980
 Current price                           68           2067         2067
 Price volatility, points (F)             2            20           20
 Stop loss offset (R)                     8            80           80
 F × X with X=4
 High (Low) since entry (T)             (68)          2067         2067
 Stop loss (S)                           76           1987         1987
 T plus or minus R
 Position, blocks                        -32            5            8
 Gain / Loss £                         £2,240        £4,675      £3,480
 Instrument value volatility (I)         £20          £100         £100
 Volatility scalar (J)                  50.5           10.1        10.1
 A÷I
 Portfolio instrument position,         -16.8         5.05         8.41
 blocks (O)
 Rounded target position, blocks         -17            5            8
 (P)
 Trade                                 Buy 15          No           No




                                                                                             223
Systematic Trading



I have to reduce my crude bet and buy 15 blocks of crude to get to my target position.
Primarily because of the change in price volatility the current position was more than
10% away from the desired rounded portfolio instrument position. Note the stop loss
gap in crude is also doubled to 4 × $2 = $8, which is added to the new low of $68 to
give a stop level of $76, but my position is virtually halved so I have the same amount of
capital at risk on this bet.
Although this looks like taking profits it is not; the system is trading automatically to
keep the amount of capital at risk constant. If I hadn’t adjusted the stop then the expected
holding period of my bet would have shortened. Because I’ve adjusted the stop I also need
to cut the position, or I’ll have increased the risk on the trade.
This feels like a good place to stop this diary as I’ve shown most of the system’s most
interesting features. Notice how the system went against my natural instincts when
I wanted to close trades too early, or let losses run. Hopefully this should show you
the benefits of rigorously sticking to a position management framework once you’ve
designed it.




224
Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating
Investor

T   HIS CHAPTER IS FOR ASSET ALLOCATING INVESTORS WHO MOSTLY
    don’t believe that assets’ prices can be forecasted, and use the ‘no-rule’ trading rule
within a systematic framework to allocate trading capital between different assets.


Chapter overview

 Who are you?               Introducing the asset allocating investor.

 Using the framework        How you will use the systematic framework for asset allocation.

 Weekly process             The weekly process that asset allocators should use.

 Trading diary              A diary showing how you could have invested over a few hectic
                            weeks of 2008.




Who are you?
If you’re an asset allocating investor you believe the best returns can be obtained by
investing in a diversified portfolio of assets without trying to predict relative risk adjusted
returns. The systematic framework in this book will allow you to do that, using the ‘no
rule’ rule I introduced in chapter seven, ‘Forecasts’. This rule has a constant forecast of
+10, implying you think all assets will have the same Sharpe ratio.
To get access to different asset classes I assume you’ll be using exchange traded funds
(ETFs), which are relatively cheap collective funds. These will allow you to access a
wide range of asset classes whilst only holding positions in a relatively small number of

                                                                                              225
Systematic Trading



instruments. I am assuming that you’re not comfortable, or unable, to use leverage or
to do short selling.148 In the example of this chapter I use a notional trading capital
of €10,000,000, the size of a small pension fund, although everything in this chapter is
relevant to those with much larger and smaller portfolios.
Your imaginary pension fund trustees have specified some constraints on the portfolio.
You can only invest in bonds and equities, and no more than 40% of your capital can
be allocated to bonds. Within the equity portfolio no more than 30% can be put into
emerging markets. In bonds you can’t put more than 25% into emerging markets and no
more than 25% into inflation linked bonds. All constraints are expressed in risk adjusted
proportions.
An extension to the basic example will be to adjust instrument weights according to
some expectations about asset Sharpe ratios. These aren’t produced by a systematic
trading rule, but this setup is common in institutional investing when allocations need
to be adjusted to reflect in-house or consultants’ strategic views.


Using the framework

Instrument choice: diversification, costs, volatility and size
You have quite a large account size, so in theory you could have an allocation to a large
number of ETFs without having any difficulties with the minimum size problem I
discussed in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’ (page 200). However to make this example
more tractable I am going to limit your portfolio to just ten instruments.
In selecting ETFs I’ve generally gone for those with the lowest total expense ratio (this is
an annual holding cost you pay regardless of how often you trade). Additionally, because
you can’t use leverage there would be issues hitting the desired percentage volatility
target if your portfolio contains very low volatility assets, as you’ll see below.
In particular you should be concerned about bond ETFs that could have a sigma below
5% per year. To avoid this problem I’ve generally suggested longer maturity bond funds
on which the volatility will be higher. Low risk instruments have other problems of course,
which I’ve discussed earlier in the book, including generally higher standardised costs.
I’ll assume, as I did in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, that you trade in 100 share blocks
as this is more economical. Using this size you could implement this strategy with just
€100,000 of trading capital and no issues of minimum size.149


148. This doesn’t preclude buying short ETFs or those with leverage baked in, although I won’t be using
them in this example.
149. The smallest position you’d expect to get is seven blocks or 700 shares, which is above the minimum of
four blocks I recommended in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’. Less trading capital would mean trading in
odd lots, with potentially higher costs.

226
                                                        Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor


The costs of ETFs will vary depending on their volatility, so we’ll conservatively use
the standardised cost for the lowest risk ETF (IGIL: global inflation linked bonds) for
all instruments. The relevant cost of 0.08 Sharpe ratio units was calculated in chapter
twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.
There are several other considerations when choosing ETFs and you should consult one
of the books mentioned in appendix A to understand these. Finally, this selection does
not constitute an endorsement for these specific products, and the information I’ve used
to choose them will almost certainly change in the future.
Table 39 shows the final set of instruments. In the example you’re constrained in your
portfolio allocations by an outside investor. You have limits on how much you can
allocate to bonds and equities, and to emerging markets and inflation linked bonds. This
is reflected in the asset grouping I’ve chosen in the table. You need the grouping to allocate
the instrument weights in your portfolio, which I’ll do below using the handcrafting
method.


TABLE 39: WHAT ETFS ARE YOU TRADING AND HOW SHOULD THEY BE GROUPED?

 1. Asset class    2. Region/sub-class    3. ETFs (Ticker)

                                          $ US Bonds (IDTL)

                   Developed              € Euro bonds (EXHK)

 Bonds                                    £ UK bonds (VGOV)

                   Emerging               $ EM government bonds (SEMB)

                   Inflation linked       $ Global inflation (IGIL)

                                          € Euro Stoxx 50 (EXW1)

                                          $ S&P 500 ETF (VUSD)
                   Developed
 Equities                                 £ UK equities (ISF)

                                          € Japan equities, € hedged (EXX7)

                   Emerging               $ MSCI EM ETF (VDEM)


The table shows the structure of the Asset Allocating Investor example portfolio. The
grouping is driven by allocation constraints and the correlations in table 40.




                                                                                               227
Systematic Trading



The no-rule trading rule, position sizing and costs
Because you’re going to use the ‘no-rule’ trading rule I introduced in chapter seven
your forecast will always be +10. To scale positions you’ll need to estimate the standard
deviation of instrument returns, the price volatility. As suggested in chapter ten, ‘Position
Sizing’, you’ll estimate this with a moving average of daily returns. However you need to
think about what look-back to use for the moving average.
Because ETFs are quite expensive you should follow the advice in chapter twelve, ‘Speed
and Size’ (page 196), and use a relatively slow 20 week (100 business day) look-back to
estimate price volatility.150 In the earlier chapter I calculated that assuming conservative
costs for trading ETFs the longer look-back would cost you 0.032 Sharpe ratio (SR)
units annually, compared to 0.13 SR units for the default look-back of five weeks, which
is a considerable saving.
With a 20 week look-back the turnover of your trades, in round trips per year, will be
0.4 times a year. If you use the speed limit I recommended in chapter twelve, and do not
spend more than 0.08 SR each year on costs, then a turnover of 0.4 round trips per year
implies any instrument you trade needs to have a maximum standardised cost of 0.08
÷ 0.4 = 0.20 SR units per year. Fortunately by avoiding low volatility bonds all of your
instruments are significantly cheaper than this, with the inflation linked bond ETF IGIL
the most expensive with a standardised cost of 0.08 SR units.

Volatility target calculation
I’ve set your trading capital at €10,000,000, but how do you follow the advice in
chapter nine to set your percentage volatility target? In this example it’s most likely to
be constrained by your lack of leverage, rather than a tolerance for losses or Sharpe ratio
expectations.
Working out the achievable volatility target given limited leverage is a two step process.
The first step involves making an initial guess as to what the target should be. You then
work out if that is higher or lower than you could achieve given the amount of leverage
you have available. The initial guess is then adjusted.




150. Alternatively using an exponentially weighted moving average estimate with a look-back of 144 days
is equivalent to a 100 day simple moving average.

228
                                                         Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor



Desired leverage     I define the leverage factor as the size of your portfolio, divided by
factor               the value of your trading capital. So the factor would be 50% if you’ve
                     invested half your trading capital and kept the rest in cash, 100% if you
                     are using all your cash with no leverage, 200% if you’ve borrowed to
                     invest twice your trading capital, and so on.
                     First work out what your desired leverage factor would be. You should
                     set this just below the maximum you can achieve. It should be less than
                     the maximum because if price volatility falls you’ll want to buy more
                     assets, so it’s worth keeping some cash in reserve.
                     I recommend a desired leverage factor of 90% for investors who don’t
                     use leverage.

Annualised           For each instrument multiply the daily percentage price volatility by 16
percentage           to get an annualised version. (As usual to annualise a daily volatility you
volatility           multiply by the ‘square root of time’, which with around 256 business
                     days in a year is 16.)
                     Annualised price volatility for the ETFs I’ve selected ranges from 6.88%
                     for inflation linked bonds, up to 22.4% for emerging market equities.

Initial guess        Your initial guess of the correct percentage volatility target is equal to
                     the lowest annualised price volatility of any instrument. This is 6.88% for
                     the IGIL inflation linked bond.

Work out starting    You should now run the usual calculations from chapters ten and eleven:
positions            first work out the volatility scalar, and then given each instrument has
                     a fixed forecast of 10 you can calculate the subsystem position. You
                     also use the instrument weights and the instrument diversification
                     multiplier that are calculated later in the chapter, to get the rounded
                     portfolio instrument position for each instrument.

Value of each        For each instrument you need to work out the value of the starting
position             position. This is equal to the rounded portfolio instrument position in
                     blocks, multiplied by 100 times the block value (since each block value
                     represents 1% of the value of one block of the instrument), and the usual
                     exchange rate you use to calculate the volatility scalar.
                     For example with your initial guess of a 6.88% volatility target the
                     portfolio instrument position for the UK equity ETF is 721 blocks, each of
                     100 shares. The value is: position 721 multiplied by block value £7.00, by
                     100, and the exchange rate (GBP/EUR) 1.2 is €605,640.

Total value          You add up the value of all your initial positions. In this case it comes in
                     at around €8,262,000.

Calculate realised   Your realised leverage will be the total value of your positions, divided
leverage factor      by the trading capital. Here it’s €8,262,00 divided by €10,000,000
                     equals 0.826, or 82.6%. This is less than one, indicating you aren’t using
                     any leverage and have some excess cash.




                                                                                                229
Systematic Trading



 Adjust                 You can now adjust your initial guess of percentage volatility target
 percentage             according to whether your guess is overshooting or undershooting the
 volatility target      leverage that you want to achieve.
 for desired
                        In this case you can increase your volatility target. Your desired leverage
 leverage
                        was 90%, but with the initial guess you got 82.6%. The initial volatility
                        target can be multiplied by 90% ÷ 82.6% = 1.089
                        So the achievable percentage volatility target is equal to the initial guess
                        6.88%, multiplied by 1.089, equals 7.5%.


This implies your annualised cash volatility target should be 7.5% multiplied by your
trading capital, or €750,000. This shouldn’t present problems to anybody’s risk appetite;
and if you assume the volatility target is at the correct Half-Kelly level then the required
Sharpe ratio (SR) of 0.15 should be easily achievable.
It also implies you should have very modest expectations for account growth. For asset
allocating investors I’d conservatively expect a maximum after cost SR of 0.4 (see page
46) which equates to returns of just 0.4 × 7.5% = 3.0% a year, plus the risk free interest
rate (around 0.5% in Europe as I write this), which you should include as you’re not using
derivatives. To improve this you’d either have to use leverage, or reduce diversification and
Sharpe ratio by lowering the instrument weight on low volatility instruments like bonds
(or exclude them entirely).151
How much would you be paying in costs? I worked out above that you should expect
to have a turnover of 0.4 round trips per year and standardised costs of 0.08 SR,
implying an expected cost of 0.4 × 0.08 = 0.032 SR annually. With 7.5% annualised
volatility that equates to a modest annual performance drag of 0.032 × 7.5% = 0.24%.
In practice you should pay less since I used the most expensive instrument to work out
the standardised cost.
On top of this would be the annual holding costs for ETFs – currently these range from
about 0.05% for the cheapest S&P 500 tracker up to 0.55% for emerging market equities.

Portfolios: The basics
As I discussed in chapter eleven, a trading system consists of a portfolio of trading
subsystems, one per instrument. You need to determine the instrument weights to
allocate across this portfolio. Because you’re using a static trading rule determining these
weights is a key decision.
I introduced two methods for portfolio allocation in chapter four. Bootstrapping would
be an excellent way of doing this, but I’ll stick to the simpler handcrafting method in this
example, using rule of thumb rather than back-tested correlations.

151. You can also use ETFs with internal leverage to help solve this problem, although you should first
understand the complexities of their daily regearing.

230
                                                            Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor


Remember from chapter eleven that as asset allocating investors with a static, rather than
dynamic, trading strategy you can use the unadjusted correlation of instrument returns
as a proxy for trading subsystem returns. Table 40 shows some indicative correlations,
based mainly on the tables of indicative asset return correlations in appendix C, without
any adjustment.
As I discussed at the beginning of the chapter, you also have some constraints on your
allocations. I’ll explain in the optimisation where these affect your weights.


TABLE 40: WHAT ARE THE CORRELATIONS OF THE ETF PORTFOLIO?

              UK        US        EU       EM      Inf     EU        US       UK       JP       EM
              Bo.       Bo.       Bo.      Bo.     Bo.     Eq.       Eq.      Eq.      Eq.      Eq.
UK bond        1
US bond      0.75        1
EU bond      0.75       0.75       1
EM bond      0.35       0.35     0.35       1
Infl. bond    0.3       0.3       0.3     0.25      1
Euro Eq.      0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1     0.1       1
US equity     0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1     0.1     0.75       1
UK equity     0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1     0.1     0.75     0.75       1
JP equity     0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1     0.1     0.75     0.75     0.75       1
EM equity     0.1       0.1       0.1      0.1     0.1     0.5       0.5      0.5      0.5       1


This table shows the correlation matrix of instrument returns for the asset allocating example.
Figures from tables 50 to 54, and my own estimates. We don’t need to adjust instrument
returns when calculating instrument weights, since we’re trading a static portfolio.


Here is how I handcrafted the portfolio weights. Row numbers given refer to table 8 (page
79).

 First level grouping          Developed bonds: 33.3% to each of US, UK, Europe. Row 3.
 Within region/sub             Developed equities: 25% to each of US, UK, Europe, Japan. Row 3.
 class
                               All other groups have a single asset, with 100% allocation. Row 1.

 Second level grouping         Bonds: 25% to emerging markets (constrained) and 25% to inflation
 Within asset class            linked (constrained); leaves 50% left over for developed markets.
                               Equities: 30% to emerging markets (constrained), leaves 70% to
                               developed markets.

 Top level grouping            40% in bonds (constrained), leaves 60% in equities.
 Across asset classes

                                                                                                      231
Systematic Trading



You can see the final weights in table 41. Using these weights, the correlations and the
formula on page 297, I get an instrument diversification multiplier of 1.61.


TABLE 41: WHAT INSTRUMENT WEIGHTS SHOULD YOU USE FOR THE ETF PORTFOLIO?

                        Within         Within       Across      Final
                      region/sub     asset class     asset     weight
                         class                      classes

 US bonds               33.3%           50%          40%        6.67%
 Euro bonds             33.3%           50%          40%        6.67%
 UK bonds               33.3%           50%          40%        6.67%
 EM bonds                100%           25%          40%         10%
 Inflation bonds         100%           25%          40%         10%
 Euro Stoxx 50           25%            70%          60%        10.5%
 S&P 500                 25%            70%          60%        10.5%
 UK equities             25%            70%          60%        10.5%
 Japan equities          25%            70%          60%        10.5%
 EM equities             100%           30%          60%         18%


The table shows the handcrafted instrument weights for the asset allocating investor. Final
weights are the product of group weights at each stage. Weights in bold are constrained
by the institutional mandate. Borders show groups.



Portfolios: Using predictions of performance
Sometimes you might want to incorporate views about asset returns into investment
portfolios. In an institutional setting you’ll often have internal or external opinions on
asset returns like “The Euro Stoxx will hit 3,000 in 12 months time.” To use these figures,
they first need to be translated into annualised Sharpe ratios (SR) using your current
estimate of price volatility. A 3,000 Euro Stoxx target is about an 8% rise from the price
as I write this. With annualised price volatility of 16% (derived from the daily value of
1%), this equates to an annualised Sharpe ratio of 8% ÷ 16% = 0.50.
You could do this within the framework by using discretionary forecasts, which would
make this example look more like the semi-automatic trader of the previous chapter.
However, you’d end up trading a lot more, which doesn’t fit well with your objectives as a
long run asset allocating investor. Instead I would recommend changing the handcrafted
instrument weights within the portfolio using the SR weight adjustments from table
12 in chapter four (page 86), according to any opinions you have about performance.


232
                                                         Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor


You should use column B ‘Without certainty’ in the table, which reflects the difficulty in
guessing how assets will perform. As an example, if the average SR across your instruments
was 0.20, and you expected the Euro Stoxx SR to be 0.5, then with an expected 0.3 SR
outperformance you’d increase your Euro Stoxx instrument weight by 17%.
Don’t forget to renormalise the weights to add up to 100% after adjustment. Please
note that you don’t need to change your instrument diversification multiplier when
adjusting instrument weights, as this is designed to get your long run risk target correct.
Finally, these adjustments should ideally be small and infrequent, since they are a source
of additional trading and so will increase costs.


Weekly process
I’ve suggested a weekly rebalancing process here which given the low volatility target,
lack of leverage and slow turnover should be fine. In practice rebalancing could be
done more frequently for large funds or in times of market stress, others may choose
to rebalance quarterly after meetings of investment committees, and amateur investors
might be happy with annual rebalancing at the end of each tax year.
Detailed calculations are shown in the trading diary section which follows.

 Get account value        Get today’s account value and work out current capital.

 Cash volatility target   Your annualised cash volatility target equals the percentage
                          volatility target × current capital. In this example we’re using a 7.5%
                          percentage volatility target.
                          Divide the annualised target by 16 for daily cash volatility target.

 Get latest prices        Get prices for all instruments.

 Get latest FX rates      Update FX rates. For this example you only need GBP/EUR and
                          USD/EUR.

 Calculate instrument     Using the recommended 20 week moving average look-back work
 value volatility         out the price volatility of each instrument. With the FX rates and
                          block value convert this to instrument value volatility.

 Instrument subsystem     Because you have a constant forecast of +10 this is equal to the
 position                 volatility scalar: daily cash volatility target divided by instrument
                          value volatility.

 Optional: Get            Translate predictions into annualised Sharpe ratios using your
 predictions for          estimate of price volatility.
 performance

 Optional: Adjust         Using Sharpe ratio predictions table 12 (page 86), column B
 instrument weights       ‘Without certainty’.


                                                                                                 233
Systematic Trading



  Portfolio instrument          Subsystem position multiplied by instrument weight (from table 41
  position                      for the example), with Sharpe ratio adjustments if required, and by
                                instrument diversification multiplier (1.61 in the example).

  Rounded target                Portfolio instrument position rounded to nearest instrument block
  position                      (in the example, 100 shares).

  Issue trades                  Compare current position to final desired position; if out by more
                                than 10% then trade (position inertia).




Trading diary
This is a hypothetical and contrived example which I’ve constructed to show the main
features of a system that could have been trading during the great crash of 2008.152 Since
many of the ETFs being traded did not exist at the time I am using today’s prices, although
the subsequent price changes and volatility levels are in line with what you would have
seen in the past. As they are not a key part of the example I’m also using arbitrary fixed
exchange rates. Spreadsheets detailing all the calculations are available on the website for
this book, www.systematictrading.org.

1 July 2008
You begin with trading capital of €10,000,000, which with your 7.5% volatility target
gives a daily volatility target of one sixteenth of €750,000, or €46,875. You haven’t yet
got any discretionary forecasts for asset prices, so you can keep the default unadjusted
instrument weights.


BOND CALCULATIONS PART ONE

                                         $ US         € Euro          £ UK         $ EM         $ Inflation
                                        bonds         bonds          bonds         bonds          bonds

 Daily volatility target (A)           €46,875       €46,875        €46,875       €46,875         €46,875
 Price (B)                                $5           €150           £22           $75             $145
 Number of shares per block              100            100           100           100             100
 (C)
 FX (D)                                  0.9             1             1.2           0.9            0.9




152. Although I do run a similar portfolio to this I have only done so since 2011. Most of the time very little
happens in a portfolio like this, so I’ve decided to set this example in a more interesting historical period.

234
                                                                 Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor



 Block value (E)                         $5            €150           £22           $75            $145
 C × B ÷ 100
 Price volatility, % (G)*               0.90           0.60          0.55          0.70            0.43
 Instrument currency volatility         $4.5           €90           £12.1         $52.5         $62.35
 (H)
 G×E
 Instrument value volatility (I)        €4.05        €90.00         €14.52        €47.25          €56.12
 H×D
 Volatility scalar (J)                  11,574          521          3228           992            835
 A÷I


* I’ve kept the row identifiers the same in all three example chapters so that comparisons can easily be made.
Row F has been omitted as you don’t require volatility in points per day here.




BOND CALCULATIONS PART TWO

                                        $ US          € Euro          £ UK         $ EM         $ Inflation
                                       bonds          bonds          bonds         bonds          bonds

 Forecast (K)                            +10            +10            +10           +10            +10
 Subsystem position, blocks             11574           521           3228          992            835
 (L)
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)                 6.67%          6.67%          6.67%        10.00%         10.00%
 Instrument Diversification              1.61           1.61           1.61          1.61           1.61
 Multiplier (N)
 Portfolio instrument position,        1242.3          55.9          346.5          159.7          134.5
 blocks (O)
 L×M×N
 Rounded target position,               1242            56             347           160            135
 blocks (P = round O)


So with 100 share blocks you buy 1242 × 100 = 124,200 shares of the US bond ETF and
so on.




                                                                                                           235
Systematic Trading



EQUITY CALCULATIONS PART ONE

                                    € Euro     $ US       £ UK      € Japan     $ EM
                                   equities   equities   equities   equities   equities

 Daily volatility target (A)       €46,875    €46,875    €46,875    €46,875    €46,875
 Price (B)                           €37       $40         £7         €15        $54
 Number of shares per block          100        100        100        100        100
 (C)
 FX (D)                               1         0.9        1.2         1         0.9
 Block value (E)                     €37       $40         £7         €15        $54
 C × B ÷ 100
 Price volatility, % (G)             1.10       1.10       1.20      1.00        1.40
 Instrument currency volatility     €40.7       $44       £8.4        €15       $75.6
 (H)
 G×E
 Instrument value volatility (I)   €40.70     €39.60     €10.08     €15.00     €68.04
 H×D
 Volatility scalar (J)               1152      1184       4650       3125        689
 A÷I




EQUITY CALCULATIONS PART TWO

                                    € Euro     $ US       £ UK      ? Japan     $ EM
                                   equities   equities   equities   equities   equities

 Forecast (K)                         +10       +10        +10        +10        +10
 Subsystem position, blocks          1152       1184       4650       3125       689
 (L)
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)              10.50%     10.50%     10.50%     10.50%    18.00%
 Instrument Diversification           1.61      1.61        1.61      1.61       1.61
 Multiplier (N)
 Portfolio instrument position,      194.7     200.1       786.1     528.3      199.7
 blocks (O)
 L×M×N
 Rounded target position, and         195       200        786        528        200
 trade (P = round O)




236
                                                               Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor


An interesting statistic is that 57% of the cash value of this portfolio is in bonds, despite
them accounting for only 40% of the instrument weight. You need more in bonds
because they are lower risk; this reflects the risk parity nature of the portfolio.

1 October 2008
The world is getting riskier but despite the Lehman’s bankruptcy a couple of weeks ago
the portfolio hasn’t yet seen significant losses so your current capital is almost unchanged
at €9,705,000. Your economic strategists feel the fear is overblown and are (a) insanely
bullish on equities with an expected Sharpe ratio (SR) of 0.6 and (b) expecting all bonds
to make exactly nothing; an SR of zero.
Using these predictions you can use table 12 (page 86), column B ‘Without certainty’,
to calculate which Sharpe ratio adjustments to make. Since there is no performance
differential within handcrafted groups we can do the adjustments in one go, treating
the entire portfolio as a single group. The simple average of portfolio performance is the
average of 0 (for bonds) and 0.6 (for equities), or an SR of 0.3.

BOND INSTRUMENT WEIGHT ADJUSTMENTS

                                       US           Euro           UK            EM           Inflation
                                      bonds        bonds          bonds         bonds          bonds

 Instrument weight                    6.67%        6.67%          6.67%         10.00%        10.00%
 Expected Sharpe ratio                 0.0           0.0            0.0           0.0           0.0
 Average Sharpe ratio                   0.3          0.3            0.3           0.3            0.3
 Outperformance                        -0.3         -0.3            -0.3         -0.3           -0.3
 Sharpe ratio adjustment*              0.83         0.83           0.83          0.83           0.83
 Renormalised instrument              5.35%        5.35%          5.35%         8.03%          8.03%
 weight**


* From table 12 (page 86) column B.
** After adjustment, weights add up to 103.4%. So we need to divide all adjusted weights by 1.034 to ensure
they sum to 100%.

EQUITY INSTRUMENT WEIGHT ADJUSTMENTS

                                       Euro         US              UK           Japan           EM
                                      equities    equities        equities      equities       equities

 Instrument weight                    10.50%       10.50%         10.50%         10.50%        18.00%
 Expected Sharpe ratio                  0.6          0.6            0.6            0.6           0.6
 Average Sharpe ratio                   0.3          0.3            0.3            0.3           0.3
 Outperformance                         0.3          0.3            0.3            0.3           0.3


                                                                                                          237
Systematic Trading



 Sharpe ratio adjustment               1.17            1.17           1.17           1.17           1.17
 Renormalised instrument             11.88%          11.88%          11.88%        11.88%         20.37%
 weight




BOND CALCULATIONS PART ONE

                                        $ US         € Euro         £ UK         $ EM         $ Inflation
                                       bonds         bonds         bonds         bonds          bonds

 Daily volatility target (A)         €45,492        €45,492       €45,492       €45,492         €45,492
 Price (B)                             $5.10          €160         £22.15          $72            $140
 Number of shares per block             100            100           100           100            100
 (C)
 FX (D)                                 0.9             1            1.2           0.9             0.9
 Block value (E)                       $5.10          €160         £22.15          $72            $140
 C × B ÷ 100
 Price volatility, % (G)*               1.00          0.65          0.55          1.00            0.46
 Instrument currency                    $5.1          €104        £12.1825         $72           $64.4
 volatility (H)
 G×E
 Instrument value volatility (I)       €4.59        €104.00        €14.62        €64.80          €57.96
 H×D
 Volatility scalar (J)                  9911           437           3112          702            785
 A÷I


* I’ve kept the row identifiers the same in all three example chapters so that comparisons can easily be made.
Row F has been omitted as you don’t require volatility in points per day here.




BOND CALCULATIONS PART TWO

                                        $ US         € Euro          £ UK         $ EM         $ Inflation
                                       bonds         bonds          bonds         bonds          bonds

 Forecast (K)                           +10            +10            +10           +10            +10
 Subsystem position, blocks             9911           437            3112         702             785
 (L)
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)                 5.35%          5.35%         5.35%         8.03%          8.03%


238
                                                       Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor



Instrument Diversification         1.61       1.61         1.61          1.61           1.61
Multiplier (N)
Portfolio instrument position,    853.9      37.7          268.1        90.7           101.4
blocks (O)
L×M×N
Rounded target position,           854        38           268           91             101
blocks (P = round O)
Current position, blocks          1242        56           347           160           134
Trade, blocks                    Sell 388   Sell 18       Sell 79      Sell 69        Sell 33




EQUITY CALCULATIONS PART ONE


                                  € Euro     $ US         £ UK         ¥ Japan        $ EM
                                 equities   equities     equities      equities      equities

Daily volatility target (A)      €45,492    €45,492      €45,492       €45,492       €45,492
Price (B)                          €35        $37          £6.5          €14            $50
Number of shares per block         100        100           100          100            100
(C)
FX (D)                              1         0.9           1.2            1            0.9
Block value (E)                    €35        $37          £6.5          €14            $50
C × B ÷ 100
Price volatility, % (G)            1.20       1.30          1.30          1.10          1.60
Instrument currency volatility     €42       $48.1         £8.45        €15.4           $80
(H)
G×E
Instrument value volatility        €42      €43.29        €10.14        €15.4           €72
H×D
Volatility scalar (J)             1083       1051          4486          2954           632
A÷I




                                                                                                239
Systematic Trading



EQUITY CALCULATIONS PART TWO


                                   € Euro      $ US        £ UK      ¥ Japan      $ EM
                                  equities    equities    equities   equities    equities

 Forecast (K)                       +10         +10         +10         +10        +10
 Subsystem position, blocks (L)    1083        1051        4486        2954        632
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)             11.88%     11.88%      11.88%      11.88%     20.37%
 Instrument Diversification         1.61        1.61        1.61        1.61       1.61
 Multiplier (N)
 Portfolio instrument position,    207.2       201.0       858.2       565.1      207.2
 blocks (O)
 L×M×N
 Rounded target position,           207         201         858        565         207
 blocks (P = round O)
 Current position, blocks           195        200          786        528         200
 Trade, blocks                      No          No          No          No          No


You wouldn’t trade any equity markets as all positions are within 10% of their desired
value. This is because the increase in equity price volatility, which would otherwise reduce
positions, has mostly been compensated for by the increase in instrument weights.

10 October 2008
The equity markets fell off a cliff last week so you’ve come in on Saturday to assess the
damage. Fortunately your portfolio is diversified enough that your losses are limited, even
with the stupid equity overweight. You increased your equity allocation only modestly,
from 60% to 68%, which reflects the uncertainty involved in forecasting returns. This
means you just tilted the portfolio towards equities, rather than completely reallocating.
But there has been some pain – your current capital is now down to €9,126,500. Even with
your long look-back, price volatility has exploded, especially in equities. The economic
strategists have belatedly decided that bonds are now the way to go and they have shifted
to underweight in all equities. Your previous Sharpe ratio adjustments are now inverted.




240
                                                              Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor


BOND INSTRUMENT WEIGHT ADJUSTMENTS

                                   US               Euro          UK            EM           Inflation
                                  bonds            bonds         bonds         bonds          bonds

 Instrument weight                6.67%            6.67%         6.67%        10.00%         10.00%
 Expected Sharpe ratio                 0.6          0.6           0.6           0.6             0.6
 Average Sharpe ratio                  0.3          0.3           0.3           0.3             0.3
 Outperformance                        0.3          0.3           0.3           0.3             0.3
 Sharpe ratio adjustment*              1.17         1.17          1.17          1.17            1.17
 Renormalised instrument          8.07%            8.07%         8.07%         12.11%         12.11%
 weight**


* From table 12 (page 86) column B.
** After adjustment weights add up to 96.6%. So you need to divide all adjusted weights by 0.966 to ensure
they sum to 100%.




EQUITY INSTRUMENT WEIGHT ADJUSTMENTS

                                       Euro          US           UK            Japan           EM
                                      equities     equities     equities       equities       equities

 Instrument weight                     10.5%        10.5%        10.5%          10.5%           18%
 Expected Sharpe ratio                  0.0          0.0           0.0            0.0            0.0
 Average Sharpe ratio                   0.3          0.3           0.3            0.3            0.3
 Outperformance                         -0.3         -0.3         -0.3           -0.3           -0.3
 Sharpe ratio adjustment               0.83          0.83         0.83           0.83           0.83
 Renormalised instrument              9.02%         9.02%        9.02%          9.02%          15.47%
 weight




BOND CALCULATIONS PART ONE

                                   $ US           € Euro         £ UK          $ EM         $ Inflation
                                  bonds           bonds         bonds          bonds          bonds

 Daily volatility target (A)   €42,780.47        €42,780.47 €42,780.47 €42,780.47          €42,780.47
 Price (B)                            £5.8         €170         £23.8           $70            $135
 Number of shares per                 100           100          100            100             100
 block (C)



                                                                                                         241
Systematic Trading



 FX (D)                              0.9              1             1.2            0.9             0.9
 Block value (E)                    $5.8            €170           £23.8           $70             $135
 C × B ÷ 100
 Price volatility, % (G)*            1%            0.65%           0.6%            1.1%           0.6%
 Instrument currency                $5.8           €110.5         £14.28           $77             $81
 volatility (H)
 G×E
 Instrument value                   €5.22          €110.5          €17.14         €69.3           €72.9
 volatility (I)
 H×D
 Volatility scalar (J)              8195            387            2497            617             587
 A÷I


* I’ve kept the row identifiers the same in all three example chapters so that comparisons can easily be made.
Row F has been omitted as you don’t require volatility in points per day here.




BOND CALCULATIONS PART TWO

                                        $ US          € Euro         £ UK          $ EM        $ Inflation
                                       bonds          bonds         bonds          bonds         bonds

 Forecast (K)                             +10             +10         +10           +10            +10
 Subsystem position, blocks             8195              387        2497           617            587
 (L)
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)                 8.07%          8.07%          8.07%         12.11%         12.11%
 Instrument Diversification               1.61            1.61        1.61          1.61            1.61
 Multiplier (N)
 Portfolio instrument                 1065.4              50.3       324.5         120.4           114.4
 position, blocks (O)
 L×M×N
 Rounded target position,               1065              50          325           120             114
 blocks (P = round O)
 Current position, blocks               854               38          268            91             101
 Trade, blocks                        Buy 211         Buy 12        Buy 57        Buy 29          Buy 13




242
                                                                   Chapter Fourteen. Asset Allocating Investor


EQUITY CALCULATIONS PART ONE

                                  € Euro            $ US             £ UK           Japan          $ EM
                                 equities          equities         equities       equities       equities

Daily volatility target (A)   €42,780.47          €42,780.47       €42,780.47     €42,780.47    €42,780.47
Price (B)                          €27               $30               £5            €13            $38
Number of shares per               100               100              100            100            100
block (C)
FX (D)                              1                0.9               1.2             1            0.9
Block value (E)                    €27               $30               £5            €13            $38
C × B ÷ 100
Price volatility, % (G)            1.90             2.00              2.00           1.70           2.50
Instrument currency               €51.3              $60              £10           €22.1           $95
volatility (H)
G×E
Instrument value volatility       €51.3              €54              €12           €22.1          €85.5
(I)
H×D
Volatility scalar (J)              834               792             3565            1936           500
A÷I




EQUITY CALCULATIONS PART TWO

                                         € Euro        $ US             £ UK         Japan         $ EM
                                        equities      equities         equities     equities      equities

Forecast (K)                              +10              +10           +10          +10           +10
Subsystem position, blocks (L)            834              792          3565          1936          500
K × J ÷ 10
Instrument weight (M)                   9.02%          9.02%            9.02%        9.02%        15.47%
Instrument Diversification                1.61             1.61          1.61          1.61         1.61
Multiplier (N)
Portfolio instrument position,            121.1            115.1        517.8         281.2        124.6
blocks (O)
L×M×N
Rounded target position,                  121              115           518           281          125
blocks (P = round O)
Current position, blocks                  195           200              786          528           200
Trade, blocks                           Sell 74        Sell 85         Sell 268     Sell 247      Sell 75

                                                                                                            243
Systematic Trading



Notice how most of the equity selling is caused by increases in price volatility, rather
than the changes to instrument weights. That draws this example to an end as you’ve
now seen most of the significant trading action, although it’s tempting to continue and
let the bond overweight come good.




244
Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader

T   HE LAST TWO CHAPTERS HAVE BEEN FOR THOSE WHO DON’T
    really believe that simple trading rules work, but are happy to use the systematic
framework. However this chapter is for the staunch systems trader who wants to use
both the framework and multiple systematic trading rules for predicting asset prices.


Chapter overview

  Who are you?                  Introducing the staunch systems trader.

  Using the framework           How you will use the systematic trading rules and framework.

  Daily process                 The daily process you need to follow to run your system.

  Trading diary                 A diary showing how the example system traded the market in
                                late 2014.




Who are you?
The specific example in this chapter will cover futures trading, but in principle any
leveraged instruments could be operated in a similar way. Trading futures is a complex
task and I’m not covering a lot of the mechanics around practicalities like getting data,
execution and optimal rolling.153 I will assume that you have $250,000 of initial trading
capital. The example will focus on building a system suitable for part-time traders which
trades daily and for which data can be obtained for free.



153. Appendix A provides pointers to where you can find further help and advice, including the website for
this book: www.systematictrading.org

                                                                                                      245
Systematic Trading



Using the framework

Instrument choice: Size, diversification and costs
Unless you have many millions of dollars, choosing which futures to trade is mostly a
balance between getting reasonable diversification and running into the issues with large
minimum instrument block sizes discussed in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’. These
issues are common with an account of this size given that you can’t trade less than one
futures contract, and many contracts are quite large.154 You should also avoid instruments
that are very expensive to trade and as always those with low volatility.
In my opinion the set shown in table 42 is a good selection for this account size.155 It is
highly diversified since it contains one future from each major asset class.156 You wouldn’t
have any maximum positions of less than the four contracts threshold suggested in chapter
twelve, although Euro Stoxx is close. It might seem strange that a US investor would
prefer the European stock market (Euro Stoxx) and equity volatility index (V2TX),
but these are the only liquid futures in these categories where you can avoid maximum
positions that are too small.


TABLE 42: WHAT INSTRUMENTS SHOULD YOU USE FOR THE STAUNCH SYSTEMS TRADER
EXAMPLE?

                        Standard cost         Currency         Maximum
                             SR                                position

  Eurodollar                0.008               USD                 8

  US 5 year note            0.004               USD                 5

  Euro Stoxx                0.002               EUR                 4

  V2TX                      0.009               EUR                 11

  MXP/USD                   0.007               USD                 15

  Corn                      0.005               USD                 9


The table shows my selected instruments (rows), standardised costs (using the method
in chapter twelve), traded currency and maximum possible positions (calculated with a
forecast of +20 using the formula on page 201).

154. This issue was discussed in chapter twelve from ‘Trading with relatively little capital’ on page 200
onwards.
155. These instruments also have the advantage that long histories of daily prices can be obtained for free
from the sources listed in appendix A, and live data is relatively cheap through most brokers.
156. In an ideal world I’d add a metal like gold, and an energy future like WTI Crude. However all the
contracts in these asset classes have relatively large minimum sizes.

246
                                                                     Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader


As well as the maximum expected position, the volatility standardised costs and currency
for each future are also shown in table 42.157 All of these instruments have costs that are
less than the maximum of 0.01 Sharpe ratio units which I recommended for staunch
systems traders in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’.
In chapter six, ‘Instruments’, I said you should also consider skew and volatility when
choosing instruments. With a short position the European equity volatility index future
(V2TX) is a markedly negative skew instrument (as discussed in the skew concept box,
page 32), but as you’ll see later you’ll only allocate 10% of your portfolio to it. None of
the instruments have especially low volatility as I write this chapter, as long as you avoid
trading the closest Eurodollar delivery months (where volatility is very low due to zero
interest rate policies). For this reason I recommend trading Eurodollar around three years
out; much beyond that and the liquidity starts to drop off.

Selecting trading rules
You will use both of the trading rules introduced in chapter six: the trend following
EWMAC rule and the carry rule. Your trend following rules and measures of price
volatility will be based on a series of stitched futures prices using the ‘Panama method’.158
For carry, as appendix B explains, the optimal calculation requires that you’re not trading
the nearest contract, but one further in the future. This is achievable for volatility (V2TX),
Eurodollar and corn.159 However for the bond, equity and FX future you’ll need to trade
the nearest futures contract, as the subsequent deliveries aren’t liquid enough.
In table 43 I’ve shown the back-tested turnover in round trips per year for the trading
rule variations you’ll be using. You can also see the maximum standardised cost at which
you could use each rule, if you stick to my recommended speed limit from chapter twelve
of spending no more than 0.13 Sharpe ratio (SR) units on costs each year. Only the very
cheapest futures instruments can use the fastest EWMAC variations.
I strongly recommend that you use at least three of the EWMAC variations for trend
following, as there is insufficient evidence to say that one or two of these variations would



157. Costs are based on average price volatility and bid-offer spreads during 2014. Maximum position
depends on the current level of price volatility and is correct as of December 2014.
158. Very briefly, the Panama method involves first taking the price series of the currently traded future. You
then take the price series of the future you traded before the last roll. The prices of the previous future are
shifted up or down in parallel, until the adjusted price of the previous future aligns with the actual price of
the current future on the day when you would have rolled from one contract to the next. You then repeat this
for all the futures contracts you could have traded in the past. Other methods of stitching are also available,
and as long as they do not leave a discontinuous jump in the price when a roll occurs, they will give roughly
similar results. There’s much more detail about stitching methods available on my blog, which can be accessed
from the book’s website (www.systematictrading.org).
159. I trade three years out in Eurodollar. For V2X I trade the second contract. For corn I always trade the
December contract to avoid different seasonal effects influencing the price, and I usually roll to the following
year by summer. There’s a much longer discussion about optimal rolling available on my blog.

                                                                                                            247
Systematic Trading



be better than the others. So the slowest portfolio you can construct will contain the carry
rule and the three slower variations of EWMAC (fast look-backs of 16, 32 and 64).


TABLE 43: CAN YOU USE ALL OF THE TRADING RULE VARIATIONS FOR EVERY INSTRUMENT?
ONLY CHEAP INSTRUMENTS CAN TRADE VERY QUICK RULES

                              Raw turnover          Maximum standardised
                                                           cost

 EWMAC 2,8                          54                        0.0024
 EWMAC 4,16                         28                        0.0046
 EWMAC 8,32                         16                        0.0081
 EWMAC 16,64                        11                         0.012
 EWMAC 32,128                       8.5                        0.015
 EWMAC 64,256                       7.5                        0.017
 Carry                              10                         0.013


The table shows for each trading rule variation (rows) the turnover in round trips per year,
and the maximum possible standardised cost to use the trading rule variation (assuming
you stick to my recommended limit of spending no more than 0.13 Sharpe ratio units
on costs).


Looking back at table 42 you could use the three slowest EWMAC variations for all of
your instruments without having issues with costs. But EWMAC 2,8 would be limited to
Euro Stoxx, EWMAC 4,16 to Euro Stoxx and the US 5 year note, and EWMAC 8,32 is
too quick for the European volatility future (V2TX).
For simplicity in this example chapter let’s drop the fast variations and use the three slowest
(EWMAC 16, 32 and 64), all of which are acceptable even with the most expensive
instrument. Along with carry that makes a total of four trading rule variations.160

Forecast weights and trading speed
Now you need to blend your trading rule forecasts into a combined forecast, as in
chapter eight. I’ll show you how to determine the necessary forecast weights using the
handcrafting method that I explained in chapter four, although you could also use the
bootstrapping procedure. To use the handcrafting method I’ll need correlations and
some way of grouping the trading rule variations. Table 44 shows I first group variations



160. Of course it would be equally valid to have different variations for the cheaper instruments, and this is
the approach I use myself.

248
                                                         Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader


within the same rule and then across rules. I’ll use rule of thumb correlations as shown in
table 45, which have come from appendix B.


TABLE 44: GROUPING FOR TRADING RULE VARIATIONS

 Rule and variation       1st level        2nd level

 EWMAC 16,64
 EWMAC 32,128             EWMAC
                                          Across rules
 EWMAC 64,256

 Carry                   Carry rule


In line with the advice in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, I will assume all variations
have the same pre-cost Sharpe ratio (SR), since consistent evidence of statistical
outperformance by one rule or another is difficult to find. This implies that instruments
with different costs, and so varying after-cost SR, would have different forecast weights
once I’d adjusted the original handcrafted weights.
But for brevity I’ve calculated a single set of weights using the cost of the most expensive
instrument – V2TX futures. The turnover in round trips per year of each trading rule
and the resulting annual cost in SR units using the V2X standardised cost of 0.009 SR
units is shown in table 45. Since the largest difference in costs is only 0.031 SR units,
the resulting SR adjustments will be extremely small and I haven’t made any Sharpe ratio
adjustments in this example.


TABLE 45: WHAT IS THE EXPECTED ANNUAL COST FOR EACH TRADING RULE?

                       Turnover        Annual cost;       Forecast
                                        SR units           weight

 EWMAC 16,64               11             0.099              21%
 EWMAC 32,128             8.5             0.077              8%
 EWMAC 64,256             7.5             0.068              21%
 Carry                     10              0.09              50%


The table shows for each trading rule variation (rows) the turnover in round trips per year,
and resulting annual costs in Sharpe ratio (SR) units for most expensive instrument V2TX
(European volatility futures) with standardised cost of 0.009 SR per round trip. It also
shows the handcrafted forecast weights.



                                                                                            249
Systematic Trading



This set of rules is identical to those I looked at in chapter eight, in the section from page
126 onwards. This means you can use the forecast weights and forecast diversification
multiplier that I’d already worked out in that earlier chapter. To save you referring back
I’ve repeated the weights in table 45 and the multiplier is 1.31. Notice again that the
EWMAC 32 variation has a lower weight because it is more highly correlated with the 16
and 64 variations, than they are with each other.

Volatility target calculation
With predetermined trading capital of $250,000 you need to determine how much of
that you are willing to put at risk; your percentage volatility target. As I said in chapter
nine, ‘Volatility targeting’, this is a matter of determining your achievable performance,
inferring from that a safe level of risk to take, and checking you are comfortable with the
likely levels of losses.
You’ll be running a reasonably diversified system, with two trading rules drawn from
different styles, and six instruments from different asset classes. When I back-tested this
system using out of sample bootstrapping to ensure a conservative result, I got a Sharpe
ratio (SR) after costs of 0.53. Using table 14 (page 90) suggests that about 75% of this
is achievable, for an SR of 0.40.
There is a mixture of positive and negative skew trading rules and 90% of the portfolio is
in relatively benign assets, with only 10% in the potentially negative skew V2TX volatility
future. I’m happy to assume this is a slightly positive zero skew system, which the back-
test confirms. From the achievable Sharpe ratio 0.4 row, column A, of table 25 (page
147), you would get a 20% volatility target and hence an annualised cash volatility
target of $250,000 × 0.20 = $50,000.
This is slightly lower than the level I run my own system at; I assume you’re also
comfortable with the potential pain of a 20% target, and with leveraged futures achieving
the risk won’t be an issue. With this relatively high volatility target you’ll be checking your
account value, and adjusting your risk, every day.

Position sizing and measuring price volatility
Now you need to come up with a method for position sizing, which means calculating
the instrument value volatility. This in turn depends on the value of each instrument
block in USD (to match your hypothetical account), for which you need exchange rates,
an estimate of price volatility and the block value, all of which were discussed in chapter
ten, ‘Position sizing’.
Currencies for each instrument are shown in table 42 and you’ll update FX rates daily.
You will be using a moving average of recent daily returns to find the price volatility of
each instrument. However we need to determine what look-back to use for your moving
averages.

250
                                                                   Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader


As I discussed in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’, we need to compare the cost of the
default look-back of five weeks versus a slower look-back. I’ll do this conservatively using
the costs of your most expensive instrument, the European volatility index future V2TX.
Let’s refer back to table 36 (page 197) in chapter twelve. First of all I need to find the
turnover of your trading rules. With your portfolio of the carry rule and three EWMAC
variations, and the relevant forecast weights from table 45, the weighted average turnover
comes in at around 9.57 round trips per year.161
Once I’ve multiplied this by the forecast diversification multiplier (1.31) the turnover
of your combined forecast will be 9.57 × 1.31 = 12.5. From the relevant row in table 36,
the final turnover will be 12.6 using the recommended default look-back of five weeks
(or equivalent for exponentially weighted moving average), or 11.7 with a look-back
of 20 weeks.
Using the most expensive instrument (VT2X) with standardised costs of 0.009 Sharpe
ratio (SR) units, the costs will be 12.6 × 0.009 = 0.113 SR units per year with the default
look-back and 11.7 × 0.009 = 0.105 SR with the slower one.
It isn’t worth slowing down the estimation of price volatility for a saving of 0.008 SR
in costs, so I recommend you stick to the default look-back of 25 days. Also I suggest
using an exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA) of daily squared returns, for
which a look-back of 36 business days is the equivalent of 25 days.
With your 20% volatility target a cost level of 0.113 SR equates to an annual performance
drag of 20% × 0.113 = 2.3% on V2TX, and less on the cheaper instruments. There will
also be a small additional cost for rolling open futures positions into new delivery months.
It’s also worth noting that 0.113 SR comes in safely under the maximum speed limit that
I recommended in chapter twelve of 0.13 SR spent on costs each year.

Portfolio of trading subsystems
You’ve now got a set of six trading subsystems, one for each instrument, which you
need to put together into a portfolio by setting instrument weights as I discussed in
chapter eleven. Again this is a job for handcrafting, so we need to think about how to
group instruments. The correlation matrix of subsystem returns in table 46 implies some
obvious groupings, which I’ve put into table 47.
Additionally you are constrained by the minimum contract size problems which I
discussed in chapter twelve, ‘Speed and Size’. In particular the Euro Stoxx future needs to
have an instrument weight of at least 20%. Less than this and even with the maximum
possible position, at a combined forecast of 20, you wouldn’t get the minimum of four
instrument blocks that I recommended in chapter twelve.

161. Weights are 50% to carry, 21% to EWMAC16, 8% to EWMAC 32, and 21% to EWMAC 64. With
trading rule turnovers from table 43 we get a weighted average of ([0.5 × 10] + [0.21 × 11] + [0.08 × 8.5] +
[0.21 × 7.5]) = 9.57.

                                                                                                        251
Systematic Trading



To avoid distorting the instrument weights too much, I propose putting 30% of the
portfolio into the equities top level group, rather than the 25% that handcrafting would
otherwise suggest. I then suggest that you put two-thirds of that 30% into Euro Stoxx,
which gets it to the minimum 20%. The remaining 10% can go into VT2X equity
volatility index futures.
I’m comfortable with this adjustment, since the alternative is not to trade equities at all,
but a larger shift in weights would concern me.


TABLE 46: WHAT ARE THE CORRELATIONS OF THE TRADING SUBSYSTEMS IN THIS EXAMPLE?

                     Euro$     T-note   Estxx    V2X       MXP    Corn

 Eurodollar            1

 US T-note           0.35           1

 Euro Stoxx          0.07       0.07      1

 V2X                 0.07       0.07    0.42       1

 MXP/USD             0.07       0.07    0.07     0.14       1

 Corn                0.07       0.07    0.07     0.07      0.18     1


The table shows the correlation of trading subsystem returns in the example system. These
are derived from instrument returns correlations in table 49 in appendix C, which were
then multiplied by 0.7 because we have a dynamic trading system (as recommended in
chapter 11).



TABLE 47: HOW DO WE GROUP FUTURES CONTRACTS FOR HANDCRAFTING INSTRUMENT
WEIGHTS?

  1: Asset group       2: Asset class     Name of future

  Interest rates       STIR               Eurodollar

                       Bonds              5 year T-note

  Equities             Equity indices     Euro Stoxx

                       Volatility         V2X

  Foreign exchange                        MXP/USD

  Commodities          Agricultural       Corn

252
                                                           Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader


The table shows the grouping of instruments in the staunch systems trader example. STIR
= short term interest rate futures.


The handcrafting allocation process is shown below. Row numbers refer to table 8
(page 79). As I recommended in chapter twelve, I haven’t adjusted these weights for
different instrument costs, since there is no evidence that post-cost returns vary between
instruments.


 First level      Interest rates: 50% to US 5 year T-note, 50% to Eurodollar. Row 2.
 grouping
                  Equities: 66.6% to Euro Stoxx (constrained), 33.3 % to V2X European
 Within asset     volatility future.
 groups
                  FX: 100% to MXPUSD. Row 1.
                  Commodities: 100% to Corn. Row 1.

 Top level        Inter-asset correlations are between 0.07 and 0.18, all of which round to
 grouping         zero. In the absence of constraints, row 4 would apply and we’d have equal
 Across asset     weighting.
 groups           However we need at least 30% in the equities group as discussed above. This
                  leaves 70% shared between three remaining groups, or with equal weighting
                  23.3% each.




You can see the final weights in table 48. Using the weights, the correlations in table 46
and the formula on page 297 I get an instrument diversification multiplier of 1.89.


TABLE 48: WHAT ARE THE FINAL INSTRUMENT WEIGHTS?

                  Within asset       Across asset      Final weight
                     group             groups

 Eurodollar           50%               23.3%              11.7%
 US T-note            50%               23.3%              11.7%
 Euro Stoxx          66.6%               30%               20%
 V2X                 33.3%               30%               9.8%
 MXPUSD              100%               23.3%              23.3%
 Corn                100%               23.3%              23.3%


This table shows handcrafted instrument weights for the staunch systems trader example.
Numbers in bold have been adjusted because of Euro Stoxx minimum size issues.



                                                                                              253
Systematic Trading



Daily process
This process can be done using spreadsheets, or entirely automated if desired. Detailed
calculations are shown in the trading diary below.

  Get account value         Get today’s account value to calculate trading capital.

  Volatility target         Annualised cash volatility target equals percentage volatility target
                            × trading capital. In this example we’re using a 20% volatility target.
                            Divide by 16 for daily cash volatility target.*

  Get latest prices         Get price for all instruments.

  Get latest FX rates       Update FX rates (only USD/EUR needed in this example).

  Calculate price           Using a 35 day look-back exponentially weighted moving average
  volatility                as in appendix D (page 298), work out the price volatility of
                            each instrument. With the FX rates and block values convert this to
                            instrument value volatility using the formulas in chapter ten.

  Calculate forecasts       Calculate forecasts for each trading rule variation and instrument.
                            Apply the recommended cap of 20 to each forecast.

  Combined forecast         Using forecast weights (such as those in table 48), and forecast
                            diversification multiplier (1.3 in this example), calculate combined
                            forecast for each instrument. Apply the recommended cap of 20.

  Volatility scalar         Daily cash volatility target divided by instrument value volatility for
                            each instrument.

  Subsystem position        For each instrument the combined forecast multiplied by volatility
                            scalar, divided by 10.

  Portfolio                 Subsystem position multiplied by instrument weight (as in table 48),
  instrument position       and by instrument diversification multiplier (in this example 1.89).

  Rounded target            Portfolio instrument position rounded to nearest instrument block
  position                  (whole futures contract).

  Issue trades              Compare current position to rounded target position. If out by more
                            than 10% then trade to get to target (position inertia).


* As usual to go from annual to daily volatility you divide by ‘the square root of time’, assuming around 256
business days in a year this is 16.




254
                                                                       Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader


Trading diary
This diary is very close to reality, since I run a very similar system to this, albeit with many
more instruments and a few extra trading rules. Spreadsheets detailing all the calculations
are available on the website for this book, www.systematictrading.org.

15 October 2014
I’ve chosen today as the nominal starting date, to match the semi-automatic trader
example earlier.

                                       Euro$       T-note      Estxx        V2TX         MXP         Corn

 Daily volatility target (A)           $3,125      $3,125      $3,125       $3,125      $3,125       $3,125
 Price (B)                             97.35        118.9      2760          18.9       0.0726        399
 Each point is worth (C)              $2,500       $1000        €10          €100     $500,000        $50
 FX (D)                                   1           1          1.1          1.1          1            1
 Block value (E)                      $2433.8       $1189      €276          €18.9       $363        $199.5
 C × B ÷ 100
 Price volatility, % (G)*               0.07        0.24         1.8         5.13         0.51        1.48

 F÷B
 Instrument currency volatility        $170.4      $285.4     €496.8        €97.0        $185.1     $295.3
 (H)
 G×E
 Instrument value volatility (I)       $170.4      $285.4     $546.5        $106.7       $185.1     $295.3
 H×D
 Volatility scalar (J)                  18.3         11.0        5.7         29.3         16.9        10.6
 A÷I


* I’ve kept the row identifiers the same in all three example chapters so that comparisons can easily be made.
Row F has been omitted as you don’t require volatility in points per day here.




                                       Euro$       T-note       Estxx        V2TX         MXP         Corn

 Combined forecast (K)                   15.8        20          -2.1         -11.7            2      -11.6
 Subsystem position, contracts          29.0         21.9        -1.2         -34.3        3.4        -12.3
 (L)
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)                  11.7%       11.7%       20%           10%         23.3%      23.3%



                                                                                                             255
Systematic Trading



 Instrument Diversification          1.89       1.89      1.89     1.89     1.89      1.89
 Multiplier (N)
 Portfolio instrument position,      6.40      4.83      -0.45    -6.45     1.49     -5.42
 contracts (O)
 L×M×N
 Rounded target position                 6          5       0       -6        1        -5
 contracts (P = round O)


Notable positions are a large long in US treasury notes, which had been rallying strongly
for a month giving positive momentum, and also had a carry forecast of over 19. The
V2X also had a substantial short carry forecast of -20, and although volatility spiked
substantially over the last two weeks, the very slowest EWMAC rules were still short after
the steady fall in implied volatility for most of 2014.

1 December 2014
Let’s move forward to 1 December. The system has made cumulative profits of around
$10,000 so your trading capital is $260,000 and annualised cash volatility target is
$52,000. There has now been a pronounced rally in the equity markets so we’re now
modestly long Euro Stoxx, with volatility easing and V2X falling in price. Interestingly
the V2X forecast hasn’t strengthened as much as you might expect, primarily because the
carry forecast has weakened.

                                   Euro$     T-note     Estxx    V2TX       MXP      Corn

 Daily volatility target (A)       $3,250    $3,250     $3,250   $3,250    $3,250    $3,250
 Price (B)                         97.41      119.1      3170     17.9     0.0707     415
 Each point is worth (C)           $2,500    $1000       €10     €100     $500,000    $50
 FX (D)                              1          1         1.1      1.1       1         1
 Block value (E)                   $2435     $1191       €317    €17.9     $354      $208
 C × B ÷ 100
 Price volatility, % (G)*          0.045      0.22       1.18     3.46      0.47      1.25

 F÷B
 Instrument currency volatility     $110     $262       €374      €62       $166     $259
 (H)
 G×E
 Instrument value volatility (I)    $110     $262        $412    $68.1      $166     $259
 H×D
 Volatility scalar (J)              29.7      12.4       7.9      47.7      19.6      12.5
 A÷I

256
                                                                    Chapter Fifteen. Staunch Systems Trader


* I’ve kept the row identifiers the same in all three example chapters so that comparisons can easily be made.
Row F has been omitted as you don’t require volatility in points per day here.




                                   Euro$       T-note       Estxx        V2TX           MXP          Corn

 Combined forecast (K)               14.1        16.5         4.7         -12.7         -1.7         -8.8
 Subsystem position,                41.8         20.5         3.7        -60.6          -3.3         -11.0
 contracts (L)
 K × J ÷ 10
 Instrument weight (M)              11.7%       11.7%        20%          10%          23.3%        23.3%
 Instrument Diversification         1.89         1.89        1.89         1.89          1.89         1.89
 Multiplier (N)
 Portfolio instrument                9.2         4.5          1.4        -11.46         -1.47        -4.9
 position, contracts (O)
 L×M×N
 Rounded target position,             9           5            1           -11           -1           -5
 contracts (P = round O)


I’m not showing trades because there would have been trading almost every day between
these two snapshot dates. We’ll leave the staunch systematic portfolio there.




                                                                                                            257
Epilogue. What Makes a Good Systematic
Trader?

T    O FINISH THE BOOK I’D LIKE TO SUMMARISE WHAT I THINK ARE
     the main qualities a good systematic trader or investor should have.
A systematic trader should be humble, and underestimate their intelligence, skill and luck.
Assume your trading will go badly, be prepared for that eventuality, and be pleasantly
surprised if it doesn’t. Don’t try anything too clever; it is probably unnecessary and it’s
more likely to go wrong.
Use simple trading rules that have not been over-fitted or even fitted at all; constant
no-rule forecasts, or discretionary forecasts combined with a strict stop loss policy. The
handcrafting method of portfolio optimisation is both simple and effective.
You should be sceptical. Do not trust anybody. Don’t trust the broker encouraging you to
trade more, the trainer peddling you an expensive course, or the author162 with a trading
system that apparently worked for them, but might not be right for you.
Be pessimistic. Do not trust back-tests, even if you haven’t over-fitted them, and even if
they’ve been done on a rolling out of sample basis. The future is unlikely to be quite
as good as the past. In my opinion a highly diversified system of systematic trading
rules is unlikely to beat a Sharpe ratio (SR) of 1.0. If you’re a semi-automatic trader
who can’t back-test their system, or an asset allocating investor with a static portfolio,
then you should be even more pessimistic and assume maximum Sharpes of 0.5 and 0.4
respectively. You may do better, but you shouldn’t expect to.
If you’re making, or expect to make, steady gains with very few losses then there is a good
chance you have a negative skew trading style which hasn’t yet blown up, but probably
will eventually. Adjust your percentage volatility target accordingly.
A good systematic investor will be thoughtful. You should know why you might be making
money and why you might not. Understand your markets and your trading rules.


162. This includes me.

                                                                                        259
Systematic Trading



Thriftiness is another virtue. Know your trading costs. Stick to speed limits: I recommend
you set your turnover so you never spend more than a third of the pessimistic expected
Sharpe ratio for each trading subsystem on trading costs. Don’t make your broker, or
market makers, any wealthier.
You should be nervous. Only commit trading capital you can afford to lose. Use Half-
Kelly: your maximum percentage volatility target should be half what you pessimistically
expect your Sharpe ratio to be. At some point some instruments or trading rules in your
portfolio will go badly wrong. Limit your exposure to this by trading the most diversified
set of instruments and rules that you can. Stay away from low volatility instruments –
they’re expensive to trade and dangerous.
The best systematic traders will be diligent when creating their systems, but lazy when
running them. Put the hard work into designing a safe system that you are comfortable
with and then do not change it. Make a commitment: don’t be tempted to meddle,
improve or risk manage. These time-consuming activities usually destroy performance.
Finally to make money you need to be lucky. Even if you do everything right you could
still be unprofitable if the chance turns against you. You can’t entirely eliminate risk
from investing but you should quantify it, and make sure you can cope with the likely
downside.
So it only remains for me to say: Good Luck!




260
Glossary

Active fund,       A collective fund where securities are bought and sold actively to try and
Active             outperform the general market. Normally more expensive than passive
management         funds, as active fund managers think they can generate, and charge for,
                   alpha. Hedge funds are an extreme example of active funds. As distinct
                   from passive funds and passive management. See page 106.

Alpha              The returns of an active manager or trader can be split into beta and
                   alpha. The beta are the returns you could get from investing in the general
                   market, i.e. in a passive index fund. Any additional return due to the
                   manager’s skill is alpha.

Alternative        A kind of beta, but which requires active trading to achieve. So for example
beta               to earn the equity value premium, which is the return from being long low
                   price:earnings (PE) and short high PE equities, you need to buy and sell
                   the appropriate shares at the right time. Like beta, and unlike alpha, this
                   kind of return does not require skill.

Annualised         See volatility target.
cash volatility
target

Asset allocating   An investor who usually does not forecast asset prices, but uses a
investor           systematic framework to create the best possible portfolio. See page
                   ix and page 225.

Asset class        Name for a general kind of investable security, e.g. equities, bonds,
                   commodity futures and commercial property are all asset classes.

Back-testing       A back-test is a historical simulation of what performance and behaviour
                   would have been for a trading system, based on the data and prices that
                   occurred in the past. See page 14.




                                                                                             261
Systematic Trading



 Beta                Used as a shorthand for getting returns from being exposed to the market
                     generally, without having any particular skill; as distinct from alpha.
                     Owning a passive index fund, such as an ETF linked to the French CAC 30
                     stock market, will give you beta returns for the relevant market. See also
                     alternative beta.
                     Also: to what extent a particular asset is exposed to the overall market.
                     Low beta assets have less exposure to the overall market, and are safer,
                     than high beta assets.

 Block value         The increase in value of one instrument block when it’s price goes up by
                     one percentage point. See page 154.

 Bootstrapping       A method of portfolio optimisation which takes into account the
                     uncertainty in historical data, unlike single period optimisation. See page
                     75.

 Calibration         Fine tuning a trading rule by looking at the performance or behaviour of
                     variations during back-testing; a kind of fitting. See page 52.

 Carry               A trading strategy where you profit from the difference between yields
                     and funding costs if prices remain unchanged. A recommended carry
                     trading rule is discussed in chapter seven, on page 119 and in appendix
                     B, from page 285.
                     See also FX Carry.

 Cash volatility     See volatility target.
 target

 Cognitive bias      A psychological flaw in human thought processes which results in poor
                     decisions being made. See page 12.

 Collective fund     A kind of fund which buys you a share in a portfolio of securities. These can
                     be exchange traded funds, mutual funds in the US, or in the UK investment
                     trusts and unit trusts. Collective funds can be active or passive. See page
                     106.

 Combined            The forecast you get for a particular instrument after combining the
 forecast            individual forecasts from multiple trading rules and multiplying by the
                     forecast diversification multiplier. See page 125.

 Correlation,        A measure of how two things co-move. Normally used in relation to daily
 Correlated          returns from assets or profits from trading rules.
                     A correlation of -1 indicates two things always move in opposite directions,
                     +1 indicates they always move in the same direction and 0 means there is
                     no linear relationship (uncorrelated).

 Daily cash          See volatility target.
 volatility target




262
                                                                                          Glossary



Data first          A kind of fitting where you specify a very general trading rule or model of
                    price movement with many parameters and then use a statistical method
                    to find the best choice of parameters from the available data. Opposite to
                    ideas first. See page 26.

Data mining         The process of fitting to historical data in such a way that you will always
                    find at least one apparently profitable trading rule. For example, if you
                    run thousands of back-tests for different rules over a particular historical
                    period, at least one will look great. Because they are highly tuned to fit
                    the past, data mined trading rules usually perform badly in a future that is
                    never the same. Also see over-fitting.

Derivative          A way of benefiting from an asset going up or down in price without
                    actually owning it. Futures, spread bets, options and contracts for
                    difference are all examples of derivatives. Derivatives often provide more
                    leverage than the underlying assets.

Diversification     A portfolio will have a lower standard deviation of returns than its
multiplier          individual assets, assuming they are not perfectly correlated. This assumes
                    the assets all have the same standard deviation of returns.
                    The diversification multiplier multiplies portfolio returns to get them back
                    to the same standard deviation as the underlying assets. It is always 1,
                    for portfolios where all assets are perfectly correlated, or larger than 1.
                    See instrument diversification multiplier and forecast diversification
                    multiplier. See page 129.

Dynamic             A strategy where we actively buy and sell assets to express opinions on
                    risk adjusted asset returns. As opposed to static. See page 38.

Equity value        A type of relative value trading in the equity market where you buy
                    ‘cheap’ stocks with low price earnings (PE), high divided yield or similar
                    value characteristics, and sell ‘expensive’ stocks with high PE, low yield or
                    similar.

Equity volatility   A measure of how volatile an equity market is expected to be, derived
index               from option prices. Sometimes called the ‘fear index’. The key European
                    index is the V2TX and in the US it’s the VIX. Futures can be traded on each
                    of these indices. See skew concept box, page 34.

Exchange            Usually a type of passive indexed, collective fund which can be traded
traded fund         and owned like a normal equity, and has low fees. Some ETFs implement
(ETF)               dynamic strategies and are more expensive.

Execution cost      Part of the cost of trading an instrument, equal to the difference between
                    the mid-price and the traded price. Those who do not trade in large sizes
                    can assume they will pay the bid (if selling) or offer (if buying), which
                    implies it will cost them half the difference between the bid and the offer
                    to trade. See page 179.




                                                                                               263
Systematic Trading



 Expanding           A way of doing out of sample testing. You pretend you are at a point in
 window              the past and then use data from the beginning of your price history up to
                     that point to choose trading rules or portfolio weights. You then test those
                     rules or weights on the data for a year after that point. Then you move
                     forward a year to the next point and repeat. See page 56.

 Exponentially       A kind of moving average where you weight more recent observations
 weighted            more heavily.
 moving
                     If Pt is the most recent data point then the EWMA is:
 average
 (EWMA)              (A × Pt) + (A × (1 - A) × Pt - 1) + (A × (1 - A)2 × Pt - 1) + ((A × (1 - A)3 × Pt - 2) ...
                     You can also calculate this recursively. If you have yesterday’s EWMA Et-1
                     then today’s EWMA is:
                     (A × Pt) + (Et - 1 × (1 - A))
                     Used in the EWMAC trading rule and also in the estimation of price
                     volatility.

 Exponentially       A trend following trading rule where you take a fast exponentially
 weighted            weighted moving average (EWMA) of the price with a short look-back,
 moving              and a slow EWMA with a longer look-back. If the fast EWMA is above the
 average             slow then prices have been rising and you buy, and vice versa.
 crossover
                     See page 117 and page 282 in appendix B.
 (EWMAC)

 Fitting             The process of picking the best trading rule. Usually this would involve
                     running back-tests over historical data and finding the most profitable
                     rule. See page 52. See also ideas first and data first, and over-fitted.

 Forecast            An estimate of how much an instrument’s price will go up or down,
                     translated into a numeric scale. The forecast can either be the discretionary
                     forecast of a semi-automatic trader or the fixed forecast of the asset
                     allocating investor; for staunch systems traders a single systematic
                     trading rule or a combined forecast blending different trading rules. See
                     page 110.

 Forecast            The diversification multiplier required so that the combined forecast
 diversification     for a particular instrument has the expected average absolute value
 multiplier          (recommended value: 10). See page 129.

 Forecast scalar     A value you multiply a forecast by to ensure it has the right average
                     absolute value (recommended value: 10). See page 297.

 Forecast            The weights used to combine forecasts from multiple trading rules into
 weights             a single combined forecast for a particular instrument. See page 126.

 Foreign             A foreign exchange (FX) trading strategy where you borrow in low interest
 exchange (FX)       currencies, exchange the money for a high interest currency, put it into
 carry               the bank, and earn the difference. This strategy will fail if the high interest
                     currency depreciates by more than the gap in interest rates. See also carry.



264
                                                                                         Glossary



Framework          The process I describe in this book to translate forecasts into actual
                   investment decisions. The framework includes components for combining
                   trading rules and instruments, volatility targeting and position sizing.
                   Together with any trading rules the framework makes up the trading
                   system. See page 96.

Fundamental        Non-price data used for forecasting, e.g. earnings of a firm, inflation rates
data               or weather forecasts. Opposite of technical data. See page 43.

Gaussian           A statistical distribution which is shaped like a bell, often assumed for
normal             returns. If your returns are Gaussian normal then you will see returns one
distribution       sigma or less around the average about 68% of the time, and returns two
                   sigma or less about 95% of the time. See page 21.

Half-Kelly         See Kelly criterion.

Handcrafted        A method of portfolio optimisation where you set weights by hand,
optimisation       grouping assets together and using only estimates of correlations (and
                   optionally, Sharpe ratios). See page 78.

Ideas first        A type of fitting where you conceive an idea, choose a specific trading
                   rule and then back-test the rule on historical data. Opposite to data first.
                   See page 26.

In sample          Using historical data to select trading rules or portfolio weights and
                   then testing those rules on the same data, which means including future
                   information. A bad thing. Opposite to out of sample. See page 54.

Index tracker      See passive fund.

Instrument         Something you trade or invest in, e.g. an equity like Apple stock, an oil
                   futures contract or a spread bet on the EUR/USD FX rate. See page 101.

Instrument         ‘One’ of an instrument – the minimum discrete unit you can economically
block              trade an instrument in, which might be 100 shares, one futures contract or
                   £1 a point on a spread bet. See page 154.

Instrument         The expected daily standard deviation of returns of owning one instrument
currency           block, measured in the currency of the instrument. Equal to price volatility
volatility         multiplied by block value. See page 158.

Instrument         A type of diversification multiplier that accounts for the diversification
diversification    across the returns of trading subsystems. See page 169.
multiplier

Instrument         The expected daily standard deviation of returns of owning one instrument
value volatility   block, measured in the same currency as the trader or investor’s trading
                   capital. Equal to instrument currency volatility multiplied by the relevant
                   exchange rate. See page 158.




                                                                                              265
Systematic Trading



 Instrument          In my framework the weights that different trading subsystems, each
 weights             trading a single instrument, have in a portfolio of subsystems. See page
                     165.

 Kelly criterion     A way of determining the percentage volatility target you should use,
                     given your expectation of Sharpe ratio (SR). A SR of 0.5 implies you
                     should use a risk percentage of 50%. However it is safer to use Half-Kelly
                     and set the risk to half what Kelly requires, i.e. for an SR of 0.5 set risk to
                     25%. See page 143.

 Law of active       An equation which states that the information ratio of a trading strategy is
 management          proportional to the square root of the number of independent bets made
                     each year. See page 42.

 Leverage            Borrowing to invest, either in an explicit way or by using a derivative such
                     as a future or spread bet where your exposure is greater than your initial
                     cash payment.

 Liquidity           How easy it is to trade quickly in size without changing the price
                     significantly. Shares in blue chip companies are liquid because you can
                     usually sell $1 million worth within minutes at close to the prevailing price.
                     A $1 million house cannot be sold in a single day without giving buyers a
                     substantial discount from what it could achieve given more time. The blue
                     chip shares are liquid; the house is not. See page 35.

 Mean reversion      Any trading strategy where you assume asset prices will revert to an
                     equilibrium or fair value. For example, you might think 1.70 is a fair value
                     for the price of the GPB/USD FX rate. If the rate goes below 1.70 you’ll
                     buy pounds and sell dollars, and if it goes higher you’d sell pounds (and
                     buy dollars).
                     See also relative value.

 Merger              A trading strategy, where if a merger or takeover is occurring you buy the
 arbitrage           company to be acquired, and usually short sell the acquirer as a hedge.
                     Normally this is done at a discount to the takeover price, the gap reflecting
                     uncertainty about whether a deal will go ahead. Profits can be made by
                     selecting deals where the gap is too large given the level of uncertainty.
                     This is a negative skew style of trading, because occasional large losses
                     are made when deals fall through.

 Momentum            When asset prices go up after previous rises; or go down after falls. Trend
                     following rules try and profit from momentum.

 Moving average      A weighted average of a value over the last N points in time, where N is the
                     look-back window. The weighting can either be a simple average, with all
                     points equally weighted, or an exponentially weighted moving average,
                     with more recent points given a higher weight.
                     Used in the estimation of price volatility.

 Open interest       The number of futures contracts outstanding for a particular instrument.
                     A measure of how actively an instrument is traded.

266
                                                                                          Glossary



Out of sample       Using historical data to select trading rules or portfolio weights without
                    looking into the future. A good thing, in contrast to in sample. See page
                    54.

Over-fitted         When something is fitted in such a way that it matches the past data
                    too well and is unlikely to perform well when actually traded. Sometimes
                    referred to as curve fitting. Also see data mining. Refer to page 52.

Passive fund,       A type of collective fund which is invested and managed passively in
Passive index,      a portfolio of securities according to some predefined weights. Usually
                    these funds are index trackers which follow indices such as the FTSE 100
Passive
                    or S&P 500. Passive funds are a cheap way to get broad market, or beta,
management
                    exposure. As distinct from active funds. See page 106.

Percentage          The target expected annualised percentage risk your trading system is
volatility target   exposed to. When multiplied by trading capital we get the annualised
                    cash volatility target. See also volatility target and page 138.

Portfolio           The process of finding the optimal (best) portfolio by deciding in which
optimisation        portfolio weights to hold your assets.
                    Normally a portfolio consists of positions in various assets, e.g. stocks and
                    bonds. In my framework portfolios can be of (a) multiple trading rules for
                    which we find forecast weights, and for (b) trading subsystems, one per
                    instrument, for which we optimise instrument weights.
                    You should use handcrafting or bootstrapping to calculate portfolio
                    weights; I do not recommend single period optimisation. See page 70.

Portfolio           The position you hold in an instrument at the trading system level. Because
weighted            a trading system consists of a portfolio of trading subsystems, one for
position            each instrument, this is equal to the instrument’s subsystem position
                    multiplied by the instrument weight and the instrument diversification
                    multiplier. See page 173.

Portfolio           In general the weights that assets have in a portfolio. See instrument
weights             weights and forecast weights.

Position inertia    If the current position is less than 10% away from the rounded target
                    position then to reduce costs you shouldn’t trade. See page 174.

Predictable risk    The component of volatility in asset prices or portfolio returns which you
                    can predict using estimates of standard deviation and correlation. See
                    unpredictable risk and page 39.

Price volatility    The expected standard deviation of instrument price daily returns, in
                    percentage points per day. See page 155.

Relative value      Any trading strategy where you buy something that is cheap, and sell
                    something similar that is expensive as a hedge. For example, see equity
                    value. Often a negative skew strategy, as we suffer occasional large losses.




                                                                                               267
Systematic Trading



 Risk parity         A type of passive fund where assets are held in equal shares according to
                     expected risk. See page 38.

 Risk premium        The reward you get from investing in something that carries some risk.
                     For example, equities are riskier than bonds so we should expect higher
                     returns to compensate us. See page 31.

 Rolling window      A method of out of sample testing. You pretend you are at a point in the
                     past and then use data from the last N years (where N can be any value)
                     up to that point to choose trading rules or portfolio weights. You then test
                     those rules or weights on data for a year after that point. Then you move
                     forward a year to the next point and repeat. See page 56.

 Semi-               A trader who makes their own forecasts about price movements in a
 Automatic           discretionary fashion, but then incorporates them into a systematic
 Trader              framework. See page ix and page 209.

 Sharpe ratio        A measure of how profitable a trading strategy is, with returns adjusted
 (SR)                for risk. Formally it is the mean return over some time period divided by
                     the standard deviation of returns over the same time period. In this book
                     I normally use the annualised Sharpe ratio – annualised returns divided by
                     annualised standard deviation.
                     If we’re not using derivatives the ‘risk free’ interest rate should be
                     deducted from annualised returns before calculating the Sharpe ratio. See
                     page 32.

 Short selling       A way of benefiting from an asset’s fall in price, usually used for equity
                     trading. You would usually borrow the stock with a loan agreement before
                     selling it. On closing the trade the stock is returned and you’ll profit if the
                     price has fallen since inception.

 Sigma               Shorthand for one unit of standard deviation. See page 21.

 Single period       The classic way of performing a portfolio optimisation: using a single
 optimisation        average over historical data of asset return means, standard deviations
                     and correlations; these estimates are then used to do a single optimisation.

 Skew                A measure of how symmetric the returns from an asset or trading rule are.
                     Positive skew means you get more losses and fewer gains. But the average
                     loss is smaller than the average gain. Negative skew means you get more
                     gains and fewer losses, and average losses are larger than average gains.
                     See page 32.

 Speed limit         A limit on how quickly you should trade an instrument. The speed limit will
                     depend on the standardised cost of the instrument, and how much you are
                     prepared to pay in Sharpe ratio (SR) units per year in costs. I recommend
                     paying no more than 0.13 SR units if you are a staunch systems trader and
                     0.08 SR units for semi-automatic traders and asset-allocating investors.
                     See page 187.




268
                                                                                       Glossary



Standard          A measure of how dispersed some data is around its average value. If your
deviation         data points are x1, x2, … xn then the average x* = (x1 + x2 + … xn) ÷ n. The
                  standard deviation is √{(1 ÷ n)[(x1 - x*)2 + (x2 - x*)2 + … (xn - x*)2]}
                  Often applied to daily returns in prices or trading system profits. An
                  approximate way to calculate an annualised standard deviation of returns
                  is to multiply the daily standard deviation by 16 (the square root of 256,
                  approximately the number of trading days in one year). See page 21.

Standardised      A volatility standardised method of measuring costs which is comparable
cost              across instruments. To calculate, add up all the costs of trading C,
                  including execution costs, fees and taxes. Then double to get the cost of
                  a ‘round trip’ (a buy and sell), and divide by the annualised instrument
                  cash volatility (ICV) of the instrument. The formula is 2 × C ÷ (16 × ICV).
                  See page 181.

Static            A strategy where you do not actively trade the assets you are investing
                  in because of changes in expected risk adjusted returns. As opposed to
                  dynamic. See page 38.

Staunch           A trader who uses one or more systematic trading rules and incorporates
Systems Trader    them into a systematic framework. See page x and page 245.

Subsystem         The position nominally held by a single instrument’s trading subsystem,
position          trading only one instrument with the entire trading capital, given a
                  forecast of returns. Equal to the volatility scalar multiplied by forecast,
                  divided by 10. See page 159.

Survivorship      A problem where assets that disappeared are missing from historic data
bias              sets, such as shares in firms which went bankrupt. Because we don’t
                  see the losses from these instruments we are likely to overestimate how
                  profitable investing really was in the past.

Technical         A kind of trading rule that uses only price data to predict prices, such as
                  trend following; no fundamental data is used. See page 43.

Trading capital   The amount of capital at risk in your trading system. Also see volatility
                  target. See page 138.

Trading rules     A systematic rule used to predict whether the price of an instrument will
                  go up or down, and by how much. When one or more trading rules are
                  put into a framework they form a complete trading system for trading
                  systematically. See page 109.

Trading           A trading subsystem is a notional part of a larger trading system which
subsystem         trades a single instrument. See page 103.




                                                                                            269
Systematic Trading



 Trading system      A set of one or more trading rules within a framework creates a complete
                     trading system; it makes forecasts about instrument price movements and
                     translates these into positions and hence trades suitable for a particular
                     level of trading capital.
                     For asset allocating investors and staunch systems traders the trading
                     system is made up of a portfolio of trading subsystems, one per instrument,
                     for a fixed set of instruments and trading rules (although asset allocating
                     investors use only one rule with a constant forecast).
                     For semi-automatic traders the system is made up of discretionary
                     forecasts for an ad hoc group of instruments, so the make-up of the group
                     of trading subsystems will vary over time. See page 98.

 Trend following     A technical trading strategy which tries to capture momentum in price;
                     you buy things going up and sell things that have fallen in price. Tends to
                     have positive skew.

 Turnover            A way of measuring trading speed. Turnover is measured in round trips
                     per year, where a round trip consists of a buy and a sell of an average sized
                     position. So a trading system with a turnover of 10 units is expected to do
                     ten buys and ten sells in a year. See page 184.

 Unpredictable       The component of volatility in asset prices or portfolio returns which you
 risk                didn’t or couldn’t predict in advance. This could be because standard
                     deviations or correlations changed, or because your risk model was
                     wrong. See predictable risk and page 39.

 Variation           A variation on a trading rule has different parameter value(s) but is
                     otherwise the same. For example ‘buy in the range 1.5 to 2.0’ is a variation
                     of the general rule of ‘buy in the range X to Y’. See page 53.

 Volatility          A shorthand term for standard deviation.

 Volatility look-    Period of recent time used to calculate a standard deviation of returns.
 back period         Used to calculate the price volatility and in trading rules like EWMAC.

 Volatility scalar   A parameter which accounts for the difference in the risk you want for
                     your portfolio (volatility target) relative to the risk of an instrument. It’s
                     the number of instrument blocks you would hold if you invested your
                     entire trading capital into one instrument, with a forecast of +10. Equal
                     to daily cash volatility target divided by instrument value volatility. See
                     page 159.

 Volatility          Adjusting returns or costs so they have the same expected risk. See page
 standardisation     40.




270
                                                                                         Glossary



Volatility target   The target expected standard deviation of returns for the entire trading
                    system.
                    Can be expressed in cash terms, in the same currency as trading capital,
                    either as the annualised cash volatility target or daily cash volatility
                    target. The daily cash volatility target is the annualised cash volatility
                    target divided by ‘the square root of time’, which assuming a 256 business
                    day year is 16.
                    It can also be expressed as a percentage volatility target, as a percentage
                    of trading capital. The cash targets are equal to trading capital multiplied
                    by the percentage volatility target. See page 137.




                                                                                              271
APPENDICES
Appendix A. Resources

Further reading

The flawed human brain
Thinking, Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman, 2011, Penguin
 Excellent book on cognitive bias. A must read.
Beyond Greed and Fear, Hersh Shefrin, 2007, OUP USA
 Relatively short book on cognitive bias in finance specifically. Worth reading if you
 don’t have time for Thinking, Fast and Slow.
The Education of a Speculator, Victor Niederhoffer, 1998, Wiley
   Fascinating and esoteric book by a famous partly systematic, negative skew, hedge
   fund manager. Part autobiography, part book on the philosophy of trading.
   Optional reading.

Systematic trading rules
More Money than God, Sebastian Mallaby, 2011, Penguin
 A history of hedge funds, but also a very readable guide to different strategies.
 Compulsory reading.
Expected Returns, Antti Ilmanen, 2011, Wiley Finance
 Comprehensive guide to the sources of returns and risk premia. Read after Mallaby, if
 you can cope with the sometimes technical treatment.




                                                                                       275
Systematic Trading



When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-Term Capital Management, Roger
Lowenstein, 2001, Random House
  A negative skew disaster and a real-life example of the disadvantage of leveraging up
  too much on low volatility positions. Probably the most useful market history in this
  list and should be compulsory reading for anyone contemplating negative skew trading.
Rogue Trader, Nick Leeson, 1999, Sphere
  Very famous example of when negative skew goes wrong; amongst other things Nick
  lost much of his money selling option straddles. Optional reading.
The Greatest Trade Ever, Gregory Zuckerman, 2010, Penguin
  A great story about a positive skew trade that worked: John Paulson’s bearish bet on
  mortgage backed securities. Optional reading.
The Black Swan, Nassim Taleb, 2008, Penguin
  A book about unknown unknowns. Taleb’s usual mixture of unique philosophy and
  market folklore. Interesting, but optional reading.

Trading rule fitting
Fooled by Randomness, Nassim Taleb, 2001, Penguin
  A very interesting book on uncertainty in general. Compulsory for anyone who thinks
  back-testing is worthwhile.

Trading rules and forecasts
Trading Systems and Methods, 5th Edition, Perry J. Kaufman, 2013, John Wiley & Sons
  The bible of trading strategies. Great resource for trading rule ideas if you need them.
Technical Analysis, Jack Schwager, 1995, John Wiley & Sons
  This, and the next book, are the best in a large crop of similar books. Compulsory if you
  want ideas for new technical trading rules.
Fundamental Analysis, Jack Schwager, 1997, John Wiley & Sons
  See above. Compulsory if you want to trade fundamentals.
Hedge Fund Market Wizards, Jack Schwager, 2012, John Wiley & Sons
  Interviews with many successful hedge fund managers. There are many useful nuggets
  of information in here. The chapter on Michael Platt is the most relevant to systematic
  traders. Optional reading.




276
                                                                          Appendix A. Resources


Volatility targeting
Fortune’s Formula, William Poundstone, 2005, Hill & Wang
  Highly readable story about the Kelly criterion, and the history of finance in general.
  Compulsory reading.

Semi-automatic trader
How to Win at Financial Spread Betting, Charles Vincent, 2002, FT Prentice Hall
  This is one of several books which provide a good introduction to the mechanics of
  spread betting in its first half. I don’t advise using the strategies in the second half, but
  then I would say that!

Asset allocating investor
FT Guide to Exchange Traded Funds and Index Funds, David Stevenson, 2012, Financial
Times
  UK book about ETFs.
The ETF Book, Richard Ferri, 2009, Wiley
  US book about ETFs.

Staunch systems trader
Trading Commodities and Financial Futures, George Kleinman, 2013, Prentice Hall
  One of many books that give a good introduction to futures trading. There are also
  some ideas for trading rules. A fine alternative would be any of the Schwager books
  mentioned above.


Sources of free data
For professional investors sourcing data is usually straightforward, but it can be harder for
amateurs, especially those not wishing to pay. Sources of historical data that I’ve used are
listed below. Website links are correct at the time of writing, but are subject to change.
Many brokers and exchanges provide access to live prices, usually with a 15 minute delay.
This delay is not problematic unless you are trading on a high frequency basis or using
execution algorithms.




                                                                                           277
Systematic Trading



 www.quandl.com                                           Source of numerous kinds of price and
                                                          fundamental data, both free and subscription.
                                                          Has a powerful API to automate data
                                                          collection, available for multiple languages.
                                                          For my own trading I currently use a
                                                          combination of data from my broker and
                                                          quandl.

 finance.yahoo.com                                        Source of equity and index data. Has an API
                                                          to automate data collection.

 www. b l o o m b e rg .co m /m a r ke t s /c h a r t /   One of the main providers of costly data for
 data/1D/AAPL:US                                          professional investors.
                                                          As the link shows you can get a certain
                                                          amount of free historic data from Bloomberg,
                                                          if you know the reference code.

 www.eoddata.com                                          Free/subscription source of equity data.

 www.ivolatility.com                                      Source of option prices.

 www.oanda.com/currency/historical-rates                  Source of historic FX rates.

 stats.oecd.org                                           Official source of macroeconomic data.

 mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.                Academic source of equity value data.
 french/data_library.html




Brokers and platforms
If you are not running a fully automated trading system, I hesitate to recommend a
specific broker. A key selection criteria is price. Estimate the expected annual total fee
from how often you’re trading, in what size, and with what total account value. Then use
this for comparison purposes.
Equally important is whether you can trade the products you want and with leverage
if needed. Customer service should be a factor, but it is hard to evaluate in advance.
Generally all other features are of secondary importance; although brokers seem to love
jazzing up their platforms a flash website won’t make you any more money.
For those running an automated system there is only one broker accessible to amateur
clients that I can recommend at the time of writing and that is Interactive Brokers (which
I use myself ). This is because it offers a flexible API which can be used to fully automate



278
                                                                       Appendix A. Resources


your trading and although it is not easy to get it working there is some help on my
website: www.systematictrading.org
There are online platforms that offer to implement your automated strategies for you, as
distinct from software that runs on your desktop, which I discuss below. I haven’t tested
any of these but they look intriguing. Just be very careful, as you are handing over your
money to someone else’s software!
There are also now ‘social trading’ online platforms that allow you to put your money into
other amateurs’ systematic trading strategies. I would strongly advise against this.


Automation and coding
It is perfectly possible to run non-automated strategies using only simple spreadsheets.
There are three avenues for implementing fully automated trading strategies. Firstly it is
possible to use Excel to perform automated trading with Interactive Brokers, though this
requires some knowledge of Visual Basic.
Secondly you can use commercially available software, of which probably the most
ubiquitous are NinjaTrader, TradeStation and MetaTrader, as well as broker specific
packages. I haven’t used, and so can’t recommend, any particular product. The obvious
advantage of these is that they allow you to create an automated strategy without having
to write software.
When deciding which to use, the most important criterion is the ability to implement
your trading rules within the right framework. Back-testing technology is an added
bonus, but make sure it is expanding out of sample or equivalently walk forward.
Also it should allow you to fit across multiple instruments and include conservative cost
estimates.
Finally you can code up your own trading strategy. In the short term this is far more work,
although it’s also the most flexible and powerful option. The Interactive Brokers API
allows you to use several languages, and there are third-party wrappers available which
widen this choice further. For example I use Python to run my strategy via a library which
is wrapped around the broker’s C++ API. I include some snippets of python code on my
website to show you how to implement various parts of the framework.




                                                                                        279
Appendix B. Trading Rules

The A and B system: Early profit taker and early loss taker

I USE TWO SIMPLE TRADING RULES IN EXAMPLES THROUGHOUT THE
  book – the early profit taker and the early loss taker. These are both variations of a more
general rule: the ‘A and B’ system. For the profit taker I use A = 5 and B = 20. The loss
taker has these values reversed, A = 20 and B = 5. I don’t recommend using the A and B
system for actual trading, but I’ve included the specification here to satisfy the curious.

Specification

 Parameters A and B      For a given variation you need two parameters, A and B.

 Standard position       A standard position size is $100,000, divided by the instrument
 size                    value volatility (as defined on ‘“What’s that in real money?” on page
                         158) measured in dollars at the time you take on your position.

 Initial position        You go long one standard position size.

 Deviation               A deviation is one daily standard deviation of returns, as measured
                         at your last entry point. Note we use volatility in price points, not
                         percentage points as normal. The volatility in price points is equal to
                         the percentage point volatility (price volatility as defined in chapter
                         ten, ‘Position sizing’, on page 155), multiplied by the current price.

 Profit target when      If the price rises by more than A deviations from your last entry price,
 long                    then you should sell out and go short one standard position size
                         (reverse your position). You are always long or short.

 Trailing stop loss      If the price of the instrument falls by more than B deviations from its
 when long               high since you entered, then sell and go short one standard position
                         size.




                                                                                               281
Systematic Trading



 On reversal             When you reverse your position re-measure the deviation level to
                         set your stop loss and profit target levels, and to determine the new
                         standard position size.

 Profit target when      When currently short you would generate a profit taking trade when
 short                   the price falls by more than A deviations from your last entry price;
                         and then go long.

 Stop loss when          You will generate a stop loss trade when a price rises by more than B
 short                   deviations from its low, and then reverse your position by going long.




Notice that this is a complete trading system, not just a trading rule, since it tells you
exactly what size positions to take. If you’ve read part three of the book you can probably
see that the system does position sizing correctly, but for an arbitrary volatility target on
a single instrument.
Here are some interesting characteristics of the A and B system.


 If A is larger than B   The system will tend to hit stop losses more frequently, but when
                         trends occur it will exploit them. This is the case for the early loss
                         taker.

 If B is larger than A   The system will take profits frequently but suffer losses on large
                         adverse movements. This will be profitable if prices remain range
                         bound. This is how the early profit taker behaves.

 Larger values of B      Will mean that slower trends will be more profitable than faster ones.

 Smaller values of B     The system will exploit faster trends better.




The stop loss rule defined for semi-automatic traders in part four of the book is based
on the stop loss component of the A and B system.


The exponentially weighted moving average crossover (EWMAC)
rule
The EWMAC trading rule was briefly introduced in chapter seven. The forecast is
the difference, or crossover, between two exponentially weighted moving averages
(EWMA) of the price, one fast and one slow. The difference is then standardised by the
recent standard deviation of prices, and a forecast scalar applied to ensure we get an
average absolute value of 10 for our forecasts.


282
                                                                               Appendix B. Trading Rules


In this version of the rule I assume you are working with daily prices for the relevant
instrument, with no weekends in the price series. It is possible to work with intra-day
prices, but this is slightly more involved.


 Look-back      To pick up trends over different time periods you’re going to want EWMAC
 windows,       variations which work over different horizons. For each variation you need to
 fast and       specify two look-back windows, in days: a shorter window for the fast EWMA
 slow           Lfast, and a larger one Lslow for the slow EWMA.
                Lfast should be larger than 1, or you will only have one price in your average.
                For reasons I discuss below, I use the following pairs of look-back values for
                Lfast and Lslow 2:8, 4:16, 8:32, 16:64, 32: 128 and 64:256.

 Decay          The EWMA formula uses a decay parameter, A, which is between 0 and 1. This
 parameters,    is equal to 2 ÷ (L+1) where L is the look-back window.* So you will have Afast
 fast and       and Aslow.
 slow
                A short look-back and a high value of A means you are giving more weight to
                more recent prices, so the EWMA adjusts faster; and vice versa.
                * I use a look-back window to calculate the decay rather than specifying
                the latter directly, because it’s more natural to think in terms of windows. If
                you’re interested this formulation comes from the Python language’s ‘Pandas’
                package specification for an EWMA, which uses the term span rather than
                look-back window.

 EWMA           If Pt is the most recent price of the instrument then the EWMA is:
 formula
                (A × Pt) + (A × (1-A) × Pt-1) + (A × (1-A)2 × Pt-1) + ((A × (1-A)3 × Pt-2)...
                You can also calculate this recursively. With yesterday’s EWMA Et-1 then
                today’s EWMA is:
                (A × Pt) + (Et-1 × (1-A))
                Note that if A = 1 then you are using only the current price in your EWMA,
                hence why I require L to be 2 or more.

 Slow EWMA      The slow EWMA Eslow will be an EWMA using Aslow based on the price history.

 Fast EWMA      The fast EWMA Efast will be an EWMA using Afast based on the price history.

 Raw EWMA       Efast minus Eslow is the raw EWMA crossover.
 crossover
                If this is positive then there has been a recent price uptrend, if it’s negative
                then prices are trending down. Since both the EWMAs are measurements of
                price, the crossover tells you by how much prices have changed recently.

 Standard       This is the standard deviation of returns in price points, not percentage
 deviation      points as normal. The volatility in price points is equal to the percentage point
 adjustment     volatility (price volatility as defined in chapter ten, ‘Position sizing’, on page
                155), multiplied by the current price.




                                                                                                    283
Systematic Trading



 Volatility          You should divide the raw EWMA crossover by the standard deviation of daily
 adjusted            price changes (in price terms, not percentage points). As I pointed out in
 EWMA                chapter seven, you usually need forecasts to be adjusted for return standard
 crossover           deviation.

 Forecast            The forecast scalar depends on the look-back window and is shown in table
 scalar              49.

 Forecast            The forecast is the forecast scalar multiplied by the volatility adjusted EWMA
                     crossover. It should have an average absolute value of around 10.

 Capped              This is the forecast with capping of values above +20 and below -20.
 forecast




What ratio of fast and slow look-backs to use?
To reduce the set of parameters to consider for evaluation, I first fixed the ratio of fast and
slow look-backs. As this requires looking at performance to avoid over-fitting I initially
used artificial data which contained trends of various lengths plus an element of noise.
There was not much difference in performance over look-backs between 2 and 6, so I
selected a ratio of 4. A subsequent check on real data confirmed this was reasonable.
This reduces the set of possible look-backs to 2:8, 3:12, 4:16, 5:20 and so on.

Which pairs of look-backs to use?
Different look-back pairs will capture different length trends. Since we don’t know what
length trends will occur in reality, I advise using a reasonable number of pairs. However
it turns out that using the series of look-backs 2:8, 4:16, 8:32... gives enough coverage.
As table 57 in appendix C (page 295) shows, the adjacent look-backs in this set have
correlations of 0.90. Any intervening values that are added would have correlations
above the cutoff of 0.95 which I recommend using to prune trading rule variations in
chapter six, ‘Forecasts’.
Beyond the pair 64:256 turnover the holding period gets excessively long, and as the law
of active management suggests performance will be poor, it isn’t worth adding any more
pairs beyond this.

Which forecast scalars to use?
I use the technique in appendix D on page 297 with data from a large number of futures
markets, which isn’t likely to lead to over-fitting as I’m not looking at performance. This
gives the forecast scalars shown in table 49.



284
                                                                        Appendix B. Trading Rules


TABLE 49: FORECAST SCALARS FOR DIFFERENT EWMAC LOOK-BACK PAIRS

                          Forecast scalar

 EWMAC 2,8                     10.6

 EWMAC 4, 16                    7.5

 EWMAC 8, 32                    5.3

 EWMAC 16, 64                  3.75

 EWMAC 32, 128                 2.65

 EWMAC 64, 256                 1.87




The carry trading rule
I introduced the carry rule in chapter seven. The rule calculates an annualised volatility
standardised expected return for the asset, assuming nothing happens to prices.
Because the carry rule is slightly different for various asset classes, the definition here is
in two parts. The first part calculates the annualised net expected return in price points for
different assets. Then in the second part, which applies to all assets, this is converted to
a forecast.

Equities, bought with cash or on margin

 Dividend yield, %            The expected dividend yield per year during the holding period,
                              or for simplicity the historic dividend divided by current price.

 Funding cost, %              Either:
                              On a cash purchase the interest you could have received on your
                              money if you had not invested it.
                              If borrowing on margin your cost of funding.

 Net expected return, %       Dividend yield minus funding cost.

 Net expected return in       Net expected return % points, multiplied by the current price.
 price units




                                                                                               285
Systematic Trading



Equities, contracts for difference (CFD)

 Dividend yield, %        The expected dividend yield per year during the holding period,
                          or for simplicity just the historic dividend divided by current price.

 Funding cost, %          The average of the interest you pay to fund a long position and
                          what you receive on short positions.

 Net expected return, %   Dividend yield minus funding cost.

 Net expected return in   Net expected return % points, multiplied by the current price.
 price units




Foreign exchange, cash

 Interest, %              The interest you get in the foreign currency.

 Funding cost, %          The interest you pay to borrow the domestic currency.

 Net expected return, %   Interest minus funding cost.

 Net expected return in   Net expected return % multiplied by current price.
 price units




Spread bet, e.g. on FX or equities

 Spread bet level         The level of the spread bet (mid-price). (I assume that the
                          financing cost is wrapped up in the relationship between the spot
                          and spread bet price.)

 Spot level               The level of the spot price of the relevant instrument at the same
                          time.

 Net expected return      Spot level minus spread bet level.
 over bet period

 Time to maturity         Time to expiry of the bet, in years. So a quarterly three-month
                          bet would be 0.25.

 Net expected return in   Net expected return over bet period divided by time to maturity.
 price units


286
                                                                                   Appendix B. Trading Rules


Futures: If not trading nearest contract (preferred)

  Current contract price           The price of the contract you are trading.

  Nearer contract price            The price of the next closest contract. So if you are trading June
                                   2017 Eurodollar it would be March 2017.

  Price differential               Current contract price minus nearer contract price.

  Distance between                 The time in years between the two contracts (current and nearer).
  contracts                        For adjacent quarterly expiries it is 0.25 and for monthly 0.083.

  Net expected return in           You need to annualise the price differential by dividing by the
  price units                      distance between contracts.




If you are already trading the nearest contract you obviously can’t use this method.163
Instead there is an approximation below, which assumes you get the same amount of
expected return for the first two available contracts.

Futures: If trading nearest contract (approximation)

  Current contract price           The price of the contract you are trading.

  Next contract price              The price of the contract with the next expiry. So if you had June
                                   2017 Treasury bonds it would be September 2017.

  Price differential               Next contract price minus current contract price.

  Distance between                 The time in years between the two contracts (current and next).
  contracts                        For adjacent quarterly expiries it would be 0.25, for monthly
                                   0.083 and so on.

  Net expected return in           You need to annualise the price differential by dividing by the
  price units                      distance between contracts.




Now let us turn to the actual forecast calculation, which is the same for all assets.




163. Ideally you’d use the spot price relative to the future, but this isn’t easily available except for equity
indices.

                                                                                                           287
Systematic Trading



Forecast calculation

 Net expected return in      From relevant information above. Note this is an annualised
 price units                 measure.

 Standard deviation of       This is the standard deviation of returns in price points, not
 returns                     percentage points as normal. The volatility in price points is equal
                             to the percentage point volatility (price volatility as defined in
                             chapter ten, ‘Position sizing’, on page 155), multiplied by the
                             current price.

 Annualised standard         Multiply the standard deviation of returns by the ‘square root of
 deviation of returns        time’ to annualise it. Assuming 256 business days in a year you
                             should multiply by 16.

 Raw carry: Volatility       As I pointed out in chapter seven, you want forecasts to be
 standardised expected       adjusted for return standard deviation. So this is the net expected
 return                      return in price units divided by the annualised standard deviation
                             of returns.

 Forecast scalar             The forecast scalar is 30. I explain below where the multiplier
                             comes from.

 Forecast                    The forecast will be the forecast scalar times the raw carry.

 Capped forecast             This is the forecast with values outside the range -20, +20 capped.




Which forecast scalar to use?
The raw carry measure is effectively an annualised Sharpe ratio (SR), an expected return
divided by standard deviation. I used the technique in appendix D and data from a large
number of markets across different asset classes to work out the right forecast scalar. This
gives a forecast scalar of around 30.

What is the turnover of carry?
It’s hard to generalise about the turnover (round trips per year) of carry since it depends
on the asset class and how often you update the value of the forecast. I suggest checking
the forecast weekly to avoid spurious noise which can otherwise be a problem. If you do
this then it is reasonable to use a rule of thumb value of 10 for the turnover of the carry
rule.




288
Appendix C. Portfolio Optimisation

More details on bootstrapping

Bootstrapping 101

B   RIEFLY, YOU SHOULD TAKE THE FOLLOWING STEPS, ASSUMING
    returns have already been volatility normalised and have the same expected standard
deviation:164
1. Choose a random subset of past returns (either from all history or a recent period
   depending on whether an expanding or rolling window is being used).
2. Calculate the correlation and average returns implied by that subset of returns.
3. Run your normal optimisation using the correlation and mean returns of the subset.
4. Record the resulting instrument weights.
5. Repeat step 1 a number of times.
6. For each asset take all the instrument weights from past optimisations and average
   them out.165
In practice then there are a few options which you need to consider.

How should you select return periods?
In the simple example in chapter four I drew individual daily returns at random; 30
August 2002 could easily have been followed by 1 February 2000 in a particular subset.
This makes life easier and is usually a reasonable approximation to reality. But sometimes
this arbitrary selection might not make sense. Poor returns in one asset might often

164. Technically what we are using here is a non-parametric bootstrap which I believe was first proposed by
David Jobson and Bob Korkie in the early 1980s.
165. I am assuming that all weights are constrained to add up to 100%. If this isn’t the case then some
renormalisation would have to be done here.

                                                                                                       289
Systematic Trading



be followed by good returns in another. This time series correlation will be lost unless
adjacent days are kept together.
In this case you need to do ‘block’ bootstrapping. Each subset will consist of an appropriate
number of consecutive returns. The only randomness is in the choice of the starting date
for the block. The length of the block needs to be long enough to capture any time
dependence.

How long should each period be?
How many returns should be in each sample? A month of daily returns, a year or longer?
Shorter periods mean that each optimisation will be more extreme. Their distribution
will be wider and confidence intervals larger. With longer periods the results will be more
sensible, but that doesn’t mean the average will perform better.
This subject has been examined in some depth by academic researchers. My own analysis
suggests that there is a small benefit from using longer periods; perhaps a 0.05 Sharpe
ratio improvement from using multiple years versus only a month, assuming a couple of
decades’ worth of data in total.
A good rule of thumb is to use samples of returns equal in length to 10% of the period
of history available. So if you had 30 years of data then you should use three year-long
samples for each optimisation.

How many times to repeat?
Here the choice is clearer; more iterations always produces better results but with decreasing
benefits. So there will be almost no value in doing 200 rather than 100 iterations unless
your block size is very small relative to your history.

Does bootstrapping work?
Again academic research has focused on this subject in great detail. For me personally
bootstrapping definitely wins over single period optimisation and equal weights. My
own research using artificial data shows that single period can perform a little better
when there is a lot of structure in the data, so that the underlying Sharpe ratio (SR) and
correlations are quite different. Obviously equal weights are better when the underlying
SR and correlations are very similar. However you will never know in advance or with
certainty which of these situations you are in!
Overall bootstrapping is the most consistent method, with less variability in performance
over different kinds of data sets. If anything these kinds of study probably understate the
benefits of bootstrapping. This is because the random data generated isn’t as noisy as real
data.



290
                                                                         Appendix C. Portfolio Optimisation


Personally I also find bootstrapping to be as good or better than other, relatively complex,
methods.166


Rule of thumb correlations
The following are approximate and should be used with caution. Remember correlations
vary considerably over time, and can be much higher or lower than shown here. First I
look at the correlation of instrument price returns across different ‘super’ asset classes.
‘Volatility’ refers to positions in equity volatility indices, such as holding a position in
VIX or V2TX futures. To avoid showing negative correlations this is displayed as if you
had a short position, i.e. you want volatility to fall.


TABLE 50: CORRELATIONS OF INSTRUMENT RETURNS, ACROSS SUPER-ASSET CLASSES

                         Bonds        Equities         FX         Commodities          Volatility

  Rates                     1

  Equities                 0.1            1

  FX                       0.1           0.1            1

  Commodities              0.1           0.1          0.25               1

  Volatility               0.1          0.6            0.2              0.1                1


The table shows correlations given long positions in all assets except volatility – shown as
if selling option risk or short VIX futures. Rates are interest rate sensitive assets, e.g. Bonds
and STIR futures.


Next I break down the instrument returns for the asset classes that form the commodity
and interest rate super classes (the other super classes do not have any decomposition).




166. Many solutions to the optimisation problem revolve around shrinkage – making the inputs of the
calculation more like a ‘prior’ by shrinking towards them. I have used these techniques in the past and they do
have some advantages. However two main difficulties are involved – the first being how much to shrink, the
second where your prior comes from without itself containing forward looking information. Getting these
right is tricky and an entire book would be needed to explain how to do it right. In contrast bootstrapping is
very easy and needs no calibration.

                                                                                                           291
Systematic Trading



TABLE 51: CORRELATION OF INSTRUMENT RETURNS, ACROSS ASSET CLASSES

                     Bonds       STIR       Agricultural         Metal       Energy

 Bonds (R)             1          0.5

 STIR (R)             0.5            1

 Agricultural (C)      -             -            1

 Metal (C)             -             -           0.2               1

 Energy (C)            -             -           0.25            0.35          1


The table shows the correlation of returns within commodity (C) and Rates (R) super
classes.


In the next table I dig further into the agricultural, metal and energy asset classes.


TABLE 52: CORRELATION OF INSTRUMENT RETURNS, BY SUB ASSET CLASS, WITHIN
COMMODITY ASSET CLASSES

                      Grain    Softs     Livestock         Oil         Gas     Precious   Base
                                                                                metals

 Grains (A)                1

 Softs (A)             0.4       1

 Livestock (A)        0.25     0.15          1

 Crude oil &               -     -           -              1
 products (E)

 Natural gas (E)           -     -           -          0.25             1

 Precious metals           -     -           -              -            -            1
 (M)

 Base metals (M)           -     -           -              -            -         0.5     1


The table shows the correlations for instruments in the sub asset classes within Agricultural
(A), Energy (E) and Metal (M) asset classes.




292
                                                               Appendix C. Portfolio Optimisation


Within the financial (bond, equity, FX) asset classes, the main distinction is regional,
between emerging and developed markets.


TABLE 53: CORRELATION OF INSTRUMENT RETURNS FOR REGIONS WITHIN FINANCIAL ASSET
CLASSES

 Emerging and developed market bonds                  0.35

 Emerging and developed market STIR                   0.35

 Emerging and developed market equities               0.50

 Emerging and developed market volatility             0.50

 Emerging and developed FX rates                      0.15


The next table gives typical values within regions and commodity sub asset classes.


TABLE 54: CORRELATION OF INSTRUMENT RETURNS, WITHIN REGIONS AND SUB ASSET
CLASSES

 For bonds in same region, different countries                         0.75

 For equities in same region, different countries                      0.75

 For FX rates in same region, different rates against USD              0.75

 For volatility in same region, different countries                    0.75

 For commodities in same sub asset class, different products           0.70

 For equities in same country, different industry                      0.70

 For equities in same industry, different firms                        0.80


The final table of instrument return correlations covers bonds within the same country.




                                                                                             293
Systematic Trading



TABLE 55: CORRELATION OF INSTRUMENT RETURNS, FOR BONDS OR BOND FUTURES OF
DIFFERENT DURATION IN SAME COUNTRY

                     2 year        5 year         10 year         20 year     30 year

 2 year                1

 5 year              0.80            1

 10 year             0.65          0.85              1

 20 year             0.50          0.80            0.85              1

 30 year             0.50           0.75           0.80            0.90            1


In my framework you will be optimising the weights of trading subsystems, each taking
positions in one instrument, rather than looking at portfolios of positions in instruments.
Because asset allocating investors have static portfolios they can use the correlation of
the underlying instrument returns from tables 50 to 55 without any adjustment.
For staunch systems traders with dynamic forecasts a good rule of thumb is that the
correlation between instrument subsystem returns will be around 0.70 multiplied by the
correlation of instrument price returns.
We now turn to the correlations of different trading rules applied to the same instrument,
which are used to find forecast weights. Let’s begin with the correlation between different
trading rules, rather than variations on a single rule.


TABLE 56: CORRELATION OF TRADING RULE RETURNS WITHIN AN INSTRUMENT

 Between different styles, e.g. momentum and carry                          0.25

 Same style, different rules, e.g. EWMAC and other trend following rules    0.5


Correlations of variations of the same rule will obviously depend on the precise rule.
Table 57 provides the correlations between returns of EWMAC variations.




294
                                                          Appendix C. Portfolio Optimisation


TABLE 57: CORRELATION OF TRADING RULE RETURNS WITHIN AN INSTRUMENT, VARIATIONS
ON EWMAC RULE

                       EW 2      EW 4      EW 8       EW 16       EW 32      EW 64

 EWMAC 2, 8            1

 EWMAC 4, 16           0.90      1

 EWMAC 8, 32           0.60      0.90      1

 EWMAC 16,64           0.35      0.60      0.90       1

 EWMAC 32, 128         0.20      0.40      0.65       0.90        1

 EWMAC 64, 256         0.15      0.20      0.45       0.70        0.90       1


Numbers shown are the fast and slow look-back respectively, in days.




                                                                                        295
Appendix D. Framework Details

Rescaling forecasts

I F YOU’RE GOING TO CREATE YOUR OWN TRADING RULES YOU NEED
  to rescale them, so that the average absolute value of the forecast is around 10. To do
this you need to run a back-test of the trading strategy, although you only require forecast
values and you don’t need to check performance. You should also average across as many
instruments as possible.
From the back-test you should measure the average absolute value of forecast values from
a back-test, or at least eyeball them to estimate the average absolute forecast. These values
should be roughly similar across instruments and long periods of time, otherwise your
trading rule could be badly specified and not properly volatility normalised.
Once you have the average absolute value then you should divide it into 10. The result is
the trading rule’s forecast scalar. So for example if the average absolute value was 0.3 then
the scalar would be 10 ÷ 0.3 = 33.33.


Calculation of diversification multiplier

Forecast diversification multiplier
Given N trading rule variations with a correlation matrix of forecast values
H and forecast weights W summing to 1, the diversification multiplier will be
1 ÷ [√(W × H × WT)].167
Any negative correlations should be floored at zero before the calculation is done, to avoid
dangerously inflating the multiplier.



167. ‘T’ is the transposition operator.

                                                                                          297
Systematic Trading



Instrument diversification multiplier
Given N trading subsystems with a correlation matrix of returns H and instrument
weights W summing to 1, the diversification multiplier will be 1 ÷ [√(W × H × WT)].168
Any negative correlations should be floored at zero before the calculation is done, to avoid
dangerously inflating the multiplier.

Spreadsheet example (for either application)
For a three asset portfolio, if the correlation matrix is in cells A1:C3 and the relevant
weights are in cells F1:F3, then the diversification multiplier will be:

      1/SQRT(MMULT(TRANSPOSE(F1:F3), MMULT(A1:C3,F1:F3)))


Calculating price volatility from historic data
In a spreadsheet package, assuming that the column A contains daily prices, then you first
populate column B with percentage returns:

      B2 = (A2 – A1) / A1, B3 = (A3 – A2) / A2, ...
You can then calculate the price volatility from row 26 onwards, using the default of a 25
day moving average:

      C26=STDEV(B2:B26), C27=STDEV(B3:B27), ...
The alternative is to use an exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA) of
volatility. In general for some variable X if you have yesterday’s EWMA Et-1 then today’s
EWMA given a smoothing parameter A is:

      (A × Xt) + [Et-1 (1-A)]
First of all you need to calculate the A parameter, based on your volatility look-back,
using the formula A = 2 ÷ (1 + L). For my suggested default look-back of 36 days,
equivalent to a simple moving average of 25 days, we get A = 0.054.169
Assuming you’ve put 0.054 into cell AA1, and the returns are in column B, in column C
we get the squared returns:

      C2 = B2 ^ 2, C3 = B3 ^ 2, …


168. ‘T’ is the transposition operator.
169. This is set to give the same half-life as the default look-back of 25 days for a standard moving average.

298
                                                                 Appendix D. Framework Details


You set your first estimate of the variance equal to the first square return:

   D2 = C2
After that you set the estimate recursively based on your smoothing parameter:

   D3 = C3 × AA1 + ((1 – AA1) × D2)

   D4 = C4 × AA1 + ((1 – AA1) × D3) ...
Finally the actual volatility is the square root:

   E2 = SQRT(D2), E3 = SQRT(D3), ...




                                                                                          299
Acknowledgements
This book only exists because I spent seven years at AHL learning the craft of systematic
trading, although there are no corporate secrets revealed here (as their lawyers will be
pleased to know). I wouldn’t have been able to write this without spending most of a
decade immersed amongst a group of people who almost uniquely in the finance industry
managed to be incredibly clever and successful, whilst still being fantastically nice and
interesting people to work with.
There are many people I’d like to thank individually who worked, or still work, at AHL,
their parent company the Man Group, and their research centre the Oxford Man Institute;
but it would take another book to do it. You know who you are.
I’d like to thank my friend Pietro Parodi for his feedback on early drafts of the theoretical
chapters where his outside expert viewpoint was invaluable. One former AHL colleague I
will mention by name is Thomas Smith. Whilst launching his own hedge fund, Thomas
still found the time to spend dozens of unpaid hours reviewing drafts of my work, and
behaved exactly like he did when we worked together; he was never afraid of telling me
when I had written something that was unintelligible, meaningless, pointless or wrong
(and sometimes all of those at the same time).
I’m very thankful to Stephen Eckett at Harriman House for discerning the seed of an
interesting idea in amongst the turgid ramblings of my original proposal. My editor Craig
Pearce has managed the difficult job of reassuring me that I’ve written a good book, whilst
also politely suggesting how it could be improved.
Last, but certainly not least, I’d like to thank my family. One day they came home and
found that their normal office working father and husband had been replaced with a stay
at home writer. Worse still he was not creating something interesting like the next Harry
Potter, but was instead writing “Some boring book about money”. Despite that you have
still been the most supportive and wonderful people I could ever ask for. Thank you for
that, and for everything.




                                                                                          301
Index


2001: A Space Odyssey, 19f                                  and diversification, 206
2008 crash, 170                                           Asset classes, 246&f
                                                          Automation, 18-19
Active management, 3
AIG, 2                                                    Back-testing, 5, 13-15, 16, 18, 19&f, 28, 53, 64, 67,
Algorithms, 175, 199                                      		 87, 113, 122, 146, 170, 182f, 187, 197, 205
Alpha, 3, 37, 106, 136                                    and overfitting, 20, 29, 53f, 54, 68, 129f, 136, 145,
                                                          		187
Alternative beta, 3-4
                                                            and skew, 40
Amateur investors, 4, 6, 16, 48, 177, 210
                                                            and short holding periods, 43
  and lack of diversification, 20
                                                            in sample, 54-56
  and over-betting, 21
                                                            out of sample, 54-56
  and leverage, 35
                                                            expanding out of sample, 56-57, 66, 71f, 84, 89f,
  and minimum sizes, 102                                    167f, 193-194
  as day traders, 188                                       rolling window, 57-58, 66, 129f
Anchored fitting: see Back-testing, expanding out of        and portfolio weights, 69-73
		sample
                                                            and handcrafting, 85
Annual returns, 178-179
                                                            and correlations, 129, 167&f, 175
Annualised cash volatility target, 137, 139, 149, 			
		 151, 159, 161, 171, 230, 250                             and cost of execution, 179
Asset allocating investors, 3, 7, 42, 69, 98, 116, 147,     simple and sophisticated, 186
		 188, 225-244, 259                                        need for mistrust of, 259
  and Sharpe ratios, 46                                     See also: Bootstrapping
  and modular frameworks, 96                              Barclays Bank, 1-2, 11, 31, 114
  and the ‘no-rule’ rule, 116, 167, 196, 225, 228         Barings, 41
  and forecasts, 122-123, 159                             Barriers to entry, 36, 43
  and instrument weights, 166, 175, 189, 198-199          Behavioural finance, 12
  and correlation, 170                                    Beta, 3
  and instrument diversification multiplier, 175          Bid-Offer spread, 179
  and rules of thumb, 186                                 Block value, 153-154, 161, 182-183, 214, 219
  and trading speeds, 190-191, 205                        Bollinger bands, 109


                                                                                                           303
Systematic Trading



Bond ETFs, 226                                         Daily cash volatility target, 137, 151, 158, 159, 			
Bootstrapping, 70, 75-77, 80, 85-86, 146, 167, 175,    		 161, 162, 163, 172, 175, 217, 218, 233, 254,
  193-194&f, 199, 230, 248, 250                        		 262. 270, 271, 217
  and forecast weights, 127, 205                       Data availability, 102, 107
  see also Appendix C                                  Data mining, 19f, 26-28
BP, 12, 13                                             Data sources, 43-44
Braga, Leda, 26                                        Day trading, 188
Breakouts, 109                                         Dead cat bounces, 114
Buffett, Warren, 37, 42                                Death spiral, 35
                                                       DeMiguel, Victor, 743f
Calibration, 52-53                                     Derivatives, 35
Carry, 67, 119, 123, 126, 127-128, 132, 247              versus cash assets, 106
  and Skew, 119                                        Desired trade, 175
  Koijen et al paper on, 119f                          Diary of trading, for semi-automatic trader, 219-224
Central banks, 36, 103                                 Diary of trading, for asset allocating investor, 234-		
                                                       		244
Checking account value,
                                                       Diary of trading, for staunch systems trader, 255-		
  recommended frequency, 149                           		257
Clarke, Arthur C, 19f                                  Diversification, 20, 42, 44, 73f, 104, 107, 165, 			
‘Close to Open’, 120-121                               		170, 206
Cognitive bias, 12, 16, 17, 19-20, 28, 64, 179           and Sharpe ratios, 65f, 147, 165
  and skew, 35                                           of instruments rather than rules, 68
Collective funds, 4, 106, 116, 225                       and forecasts, 113
  and derivatives, 107                                 Dow Jones stock index, 23
  and costs, 181
Commitment mechanisms, 17, 18                          Education of a Speculator, 17
Compounding of returns, 143&f                          Einstein, 70
Contango: see Carry                                    Elliot waves, 109
Contracts for Difference, 106, 181                     Emotions, 2-3
Contrarians, 45                                        Equal portfolio weights, 72-73
Corn trading, 247f                                     Equity value strategies, 4, 29, 31
Correlation, 42, 59f, 63, 68, 70, 73, 104, 107, 122,   Equity volatility indices, 34, 246, 247
		 129, 131, 167-168, 171                              Eurex, 180
  and Sharpe ratios, 64                                Euro Stoxx 50 Index Futures, 179-180, 181, 				
  and trading subsystems, 170                          182, 187-188, 193, 198
  and ETFs, 231                                        Eurodollar, trading recommendation, 247
Cost of execution, 179-181, 183, 188, 199, 203         Exchange rate, 161, 185
Cost of trading, 42, 68, 104, 107, 174, 178, 181, 		   Exchange traded funds (ETFs), 4, 106, 183-184, 		
		230                                                  		 189, 197, 200, 214, 225, 226-228
Credit Default Swap derivatives, 105                      holding costs of, 230
Crowded trades, 45                                        daily regearing of, 230f
Crude oil futures, 246f                                   correlations, 231
Curve fitting: see over-fitting
                                                       Exchanges, trading on, 105, 107
                                                       Exponentially Weighted Moving Average Crossover


304
                                                                                                       Index


		 (EWMAC), 117-123, 126, 127-128, 132, 247              Human qualities of successful traders, 259-260
  see also Appendix B                                    Hunt brothers, 17

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 2                            ‘Ideas First’, 26-27, 52-54, 103, 146
Fees, 3                                                  Ilmanen, Antti, 30f
Fibonacci, 37, 109                                       Illiquid assets, 198
Forecasts, 110-115, 121-123, 159, 175, 196, 211          Index trackers, 106
  scaling of, 112-113, 115, 133                          Inflation, 67
  combined, 125-133, 196, 248, 251                       Instrument blocks, 154-155, 175, 182-183, 185, 		
  weighted average of, 126                               		206
  and risk, 137                                          Instrument currency volatility, 182-183, 203, 214
  and speed of trading, 178                                 and turnover, 185, 195, 198
  and turnover, 185                                      Instrument diversification multiplier, 166, 169-170,
                                                         		 171, 173, 175, 201, 206, 215, 229, 232, 253
  not changing once bet open, 211
                                                         Instrument forecast, 161, 162
  see also Appendix D
                                                         Instrument riskiness, 155, 182
Forecast diversification multiplier, 128-133, 193f, 		
		 196, 249, 251                                         Instrument subsystem position, 175, 233
  see also Appendix D                                    Instrument weights, 166-167, 169, 173, 175, 189, 		
                                                         		 198, 201, 202, 203, 206, 215, 229, 253
Foreign exchange carry trading, 36
                                                            and Sharpe ratios, 168
Fortune’s Formula, 143f
                                                            and asset allocating investors, 226
FTSE 100 futures, 183, 210
                                                            and crash of 2008, 244
Futures contracts, 181
  and block value, 154-155
                                                         Japan, 36
                                                         Japanese government bonds, 102, 112, 114, 200
Gambling, 15, 20
                                                         JP Morgan, 156f
Gaussian normal distribution, 22, 32&f, 39, 111f, 		
		 113, 114, 139f
German bond futures, 112, 155, 181, 198                  Kahn, Richard, 42
Gold, 246f                                               Kaufman, Perry, 117
Google, 29                                               Kelly, John, and Kelly Criterion, 143-146, 149, 151
Gross Domestic Product, 1                                  ‘Half-Kelly’ 146-147, 148, 230, 260
                                                         Koijen, Ralph, 119
‘Handcrafting’, 78-85, 116, 167-168, 175, 194, 			
		 199, 230, 248, 259                                    Law of active management, 41-42, 43, 44, 46, 129f
  and over-fitting, 84                                     and Sharpe ratios, 47
  and Sharpe ratios, 85-90                               Leeson, Nick, 41
  and forecast weights, 127, 205                         Lehman Brothers, 2, 237
  worked example for portfolio weights, 231-232          Leverage, 4, 21&f, 35, 95f, 138f, 142-143
  and allocation for staunch systems traders, 253          and skew, 44-45
Hedge funds, 3, 177                                        and low-risk assets, 103
High frequency trading, 6, 16, 30, 36, 180                 and derivatives, 106
Holding costs, 181                                         and volatility targeting, 151
Housekeeping, daily, 217                                   realised leverage, 229
  for staunch systems traders, 254                       Life expectancy of investor, and risk, 141


                                                                                                          305
Systematic Trading



Limit orders, 179                                      Over-fitting, 19-20, 27-28, 48, 51-54, 58, 65, 68, 		
Liquidity, 35, 104-105, 107                            		 121f, 156, 259
Lo, Andrew, 60f, 63f                                     and Sharpe ratios, 46f, 47, 146
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), 41, 46              avoiding fitting, 67-68
  Sharpe ratio of, 47                                    of portfolio weights, 68-69
Low volatility instruments, need to avoid, 143, 151,     possibility of in ‘handcrafting’, 84
		 210, 230, 260                                       Overtrading, 179
Lowenstein, Roger, 41, 46f
Luck, need for, 260                                    Panama method, 247&f
Lynch, Peter, 37                                       Passive indexing, 3
                                                       Passive management, 3, 4
Markowitz, Harry, 70, 72                               Paulson, John, 31, 41
Maximum number of bets, 215                            Pension funds, 3
Mean reversion trading, 31, 43, 45, 52, 213f           ‘Peso problem’, 30&f
‘Meddling’, 17, 18, 19, 21, 136, 260                   Position inertia, 173-174, 193f, 196, 198, 217
  and forecasts, 115                                   Position sizing, 94, 153-163, 214
  and volatility targets, 148                          Poundstone, William, 143f
Merger arbitrage, 29                                   Price movements, reasons for, 103, 107
Mid-price, 179, 181                                    Portfolio instrument position, 173, 175, 218, 254, 		
Minimum sizes, 102, 107                                		256, 257
Modular frameworks, 93, 95-99                          Portfolio optimization, 70-90, 167
Modularity, 5                                          Portfolio size, 44, 178
Momentum, 42, 67, 68, 117                              Portfolio weighted position, 97, 99, 101, 109, 125,
                                                       		 135, 153, 165, 167, 177, 267
Moving averages, 94, 195, 197
                                                          and diversification, 170
MSCI, 156f
                                                       Price-to-earnings (P/E) ratios 4
                                                       Prospect theory, 12-13, 37
Narrative fallacy, 20, 27, 28, 64
                                                          and momentum, 117
NASDAQ futures, 188
Nervousness, need for, 260
                                                       Quant Quake, the, 46
New position opening, 218
Niederhoffer, Victor, 17
                                                       Raspberry Pi micro computers, 4
                                                       Relative value, 30, 43, 44-46, 213f
Odean, Terence, 13, 20f
                                                       Retail stockbrokers, 4
Odysseus, 17
                                                       Risk, 39, 137-148, 170
Oil prices, standard deviation of, 211
                                                         Risk targeting, 136
O’Shea, Colm, 94f
                                                         Natural risk and leverage, 142
Online portfolio calculators, 129f
                                                       Risk parity investing, 38, 116&f
Overbetting, 21
                                                       Risk premia, 31, 119
Over the counter (OTC) trading, 105, 106, 107, 		
		183f                                                 RiskMetrics (TM), 156&f
Overconfidence, 6, 17, 19f, 54, 58, 136                Roll down: see Carry
  and lack of diversification, 20                      Rolling up profits and losses, 149
  and overtrading, 179                                 Rogue Trader, 41
                                                       Rounded target position, 173, 175, 218


306
                                                                                                        Index


Rules of thumb, 186, 230                                 Short option strategies, 41
  see also Appendix C                                    Short selling, 30, 37
Rumsfeld, Donald, 39&f                                   Single period optimisation, 71, 85, 89
                                                         Skew, positive and negative, 32-34, 40-41, 48, 105,
Safe haven assets, 34                                    		 107, 136, 139-141, 247, 259
Schwager, Jack, 94f                                        and liquidity, 36
Self-fulfilling prophecies, 37                             and prospect theory, 37
Semi-automatic trading, 4, 7, 11f, 18, 19f, 37, 38, 		     and risk, 39, 138
		 98, 163, 169, 209-224, 259                              and leverage, 44-45, 142
  and portfolio size, 44, 203                              and Sharpe ratios, 47, 62f, 146
  and Sharpe ratios, 47, 147-148                           and trend following, 115, 117
  and modular frameworks, 95                               and EWMAC, 119
  and trading rules, 109                                   and carry, 119
  and forecasts, 114, 122-123, 159                         and V2TX, 250
  and eyeballing charts, 155, 195, 197, 214              ‘Social trading’, 4f
  and diversification, 166, 206                          Soros, George, and sterling, 36f
  and instrument weights, 166, 175, 189                  Speed of trading, 41-43, 47, 48, 104, 122, 174f, 		
  and correlation, 169                                   		177-205, 248
  and trading subsystems, 169                              speed limits, 187-189, 196, 198-199, 204, 213, 		
                                                           228, 251, 260
  and instrument diversification multiplier, 171, 		
  175                                                    Spread betting, 6, 106, 181, 197, 214
  and rules of thumb, 186                                  and block value, 154-155
  and overconfidence, 188                                  and UK tax, 183f
  and stop losses, 189, 192                                oil example, 214
  and trading speeds, 190-192, 205                       Spreadsheets, 218
Sharpe ratios, 25, 31-32, 34, 35, 42, 43, 44, 46-48,     Stamp duty, 181
		 53, 58, 60f, 67, 72, 73, 112, 184, 189, 210, 		       Standardised cost estimates, 203-205, 210, 226, 230
		 214, 250, 259                                         Standard deviations, 21-22, 31-32, 38, 40, 70, 103,
  and overconfidence, 54, 136, 151                       		 107, 111f, 129
  and rule testing, 59-60, 65                              and skew, 105
  and T-Test, 61-63                                        and forecasts, 112, 114, 128
  and skew, 62f, 66                                        recent, 155-158
  and correlation, 64                                      returns, 167
  and diversification, 65f                                 and standardised cost, 182, 188, 192
  difficulty in distinguishing, 74                         and stop losses, 211
  and handcrafting, 85-90                                Static and dynamic trading, 38, 43, 168, 188
  and factors of pessimism, 90                           Staunch systems trading, 4, 7, 51-68, 69, 98, 109, 		
  and risk, 137f, 138                                    		 117-123, 167, 245-257
  and volatility targets, 144-145, 151                     and Sharpe ratios, 46, 146, 189
  and speed of trading, 178-179, 196, 204                  and forecasts, 110-114, 122-123, 189
  need for conservative estimation of, 195                 and instrument forecast, 161
  and asset allocating investors, 225                      and instrument weights, 166, 175, 198-199
  and crash of 2008, 240                                   and correlation, 170
Schatz futures: see German bond futures                    and rules of thumb, 186
Shefrin, Hersh, 13&f                                       and trading speeds, 191-192, 205


                                                                                                          307
Systematic Trading



  and back-testing, 193                                   and turnover, 196
  and diversification, 206                                cost calculations for, 204
Stop losses, 94-5, 115, 121f, 137f, 189, 192, 214, 		   Traditional portfolio allocation, 167
		 216f, 217, 218                                       Trend following, 28, 30, 37, 45, 47f, 67, 117, 137f,
  and forecasts, 211-212                                		 194f, 212f, 247
  and different instruments, 213                          and skew, 105, 115, 117, 213
  and price volatility, 216                             Turnover, 184-186, 195, 197, 198, 205, 228, 260
Survivorship bias, 29                                     methods of calculation, 204
Swiss franc, 36, 103, 105, 142-143                        back-testing of, 247-248
System parameters, 186                                  Twitter, 29
Systematica hedge fund, 26
                                                        V2TX index, 246, 247, 249
Taking profits and losses, 13-15, 16-18, 58, 94-95,     Value at risk, 137
		149                                                   VIX futures, 105
  and trend following, 37                               Volatility, 21, 103, 107, 116, 129, 150, 226, 229
  see also Appendix B                                     and targets, 95, 98, 106, 158, 159, 185
Taleb, Nassim, 39f, 41                                    unpredictability of, 45
Tax (UK), 106, 183f                                       price volatility, 155-158, 162-163, 189, 196, 			
Technical analysis, 18, 29                                197, 200, 205, 214, 228, Appendix D
Technology bubble of 1999, 35                             and crash of 2008, 240-244
Templeton, John, 37                                       instrument currency volatility, 158, 161
The Black Swan, 39f                                       instrument value volatility, 161, 172, 250
The Greatest Trade Ever, 31f, 41                          scalars, 159-160, 162, 185, 201, 206, 215, 217, 		
Thorpe, Ed, 146f                                          218, 229
Thriftiness, need for, 260                                look-back period, 155, 195-197
Timing, 2                                                 and speed of trading, 178
Too much/little capital, 206, 246f                      Volatility standardisation, 40, 71, 72, 73, 167, 182,
                                                        		185
Trading capital, 150-151, 158, 165, 167, 178, 192,
		199-202                                                 and forecasts, 112, 121, 129
  starting low, 148                                       and block value, 155
  reducing, 149                                         Volatility standardized costs, 247
  and turnover, 185                                     Volatility targeting, 135-151, 171f, 188, 192, 201f,
                                                        		 213-215, 230, 233, 250, 259
  daily calculation of, 217
Trading rules, 3-4, 7, 16, 25-26, 78, 95, 97-98, 			
		 101, 109, 121, 125, 135, 159, 161, 187, 249,         Walk forward fitting: see Back testing, rolling 				
		259                                                   		window
  need for small number of, 67-68, 193                  Weekly rebalancing process, for asset allocating 			
                                                        		investors, 233
  Kaufman, Perry’s guide to, 117
                                                        When Genius Failed, 40, 46f
  and speed of trading, 178, 205
                                                        Women as makers of investment decisions, 17&f
  cost calculations for, 204
                                                        www.systematictrading.org, 234
  see also Appendix B
Trading subsystems, 98-99, 116, 159, 162, 163, 			
		 165, 166, 167&f, 169, 171f, 172, 175-176, 		         Zuckerman, Gregory, 31f
		 185, 187, 230, 251-252, 260
  and correlation, 170


308
           THANKS
                FOR READING!
Our readers mean everything to us at Harriman House. As a special
 thank you for buying this book, let us help you save as much as
                   possible on your next read:


                                        1
If you’ve never ordered from us before, get £5 off your first order at
         ha r r i m a n - ho u s e . c o m with this code: st51

 Already a customer? Get £5 off an order of £25 or more with this
                          code: st25


                                        2
Get 7 days’ FREE access to hundreds of our books at v o l ow. c o –
              simply head to the website and sign up.

                               Thanks again!
                                 from the team at


                           Hh      Harriman House




           Codes can only be used once per customer and order. T&Cs apply.
